Thoth Empress Tarot Card Tutorial
Source: https://www.esotericmeanings.com/thoth-empress-tarot-card/
Saved: 2026-08-02 (local reference copy; content (c) esotericmeanings.com)
One file per card lives in reference/esoteric-meanings/, named <NN>-<slug>.txt

------------------------------------------------------------

(ii) Thoth Empress

As a woman in the world she gives forth milk for the infant; as the Cosmic
Empress she nurtures the Universe with the milk of Spiritual Light. She acts
in both microcosm and macrocosm.

(iii) Mythology

Consort to the Emperor, whom she faces. She is Venus (Aphrodite), he is Mars
(the God of War). Venus, Goddess of Love, in a passionate affair with Mars.

(iv) Rider Waite Empress

Connection with nature and life; natures abundance around her, glyph of Venus
visible. Waite: "She is the inferior Garden of Eden, the Earthly Paradise, all
that is symbolized by the visible house of man."

(v) Empress & Tree of Life — Path 14: Illuminating (Luminous) Intelligence

Luminous Intelligence = every form in the universe contains spiritual light;
this path is the expression of the spiritual light contained within manifested
form. Binah (universal female principle) receives the male force of life from
Chokmah, nurtures it in her womb, and delivers it transformed into the Universe
as it travels down the Tree. The Empress connects CHOKMAH and BINAH — slightly
less well placed than the Priestess (not in direct contact with Kether), but
she rules the last path before the Abyss and is the FIRST trump to connect the
two pillars together. Ruled by Venus, who links all the sephiroth on the Tree
through UNIVERSAL LOVE (not the projection/desire love of Netzach). Crowley:
"She combines the highest spiritual with the lowest material qualities. For
this reason, she is fitted to represent one of the three alchemical forms of
energy" (BoT p.75).

(vi) Hebrew & Astrology

DALETH ("Door"). The Door where all souls are sent out and return — birth and
death. The space between the unity of the Supernal triangle (Kether, Chokmah,
Binah) and the manifested states below (duality, polarity, division), analogous
to the Garden of Eden. She is the door to both spirit entering matter and matter
absorbing into spirit. Astrology: Venus.

(vii) Symbolism

- Crown of Isis = waxing, waning and full moon.
- Sits between waxing and waning moons = she FACES the waxing moon (growth,
  fertility, love) vs waning moon (letting go). Both moons REVOLVE = balance of
  opposites in nature.
- Uprights of throne = twisted and fluid-like, representing her femininity and
  fluidity, like water.
- Dove & Sparrow = closely associated with Venus (myrtle, rose, apple, poppy
  sacred to Aphrodite; sparrow, dove, swan, swallow among her animals).
- Orb & Cross = glyph for the alchemical catalyst ANTIMONY. The cross on her
  crown is the MALTESE CROSS = 4 elements in perfect balance.
- Rose & Green dress = colours of Venus (her astrological attribution).
- Bees on dress = her energy and vitality.
- Dominos = black & white, male-female, Chokmah-Binah (from French "domino,"
  a priest's hood black outside / white inside).
- Flower arrangement on dress = dominoes surrounded by spiral patterns
  symbolising rose petals = the love which unites duality.
- Girdle = zodiac pattern = her universality across all signs / all creation;
  love unites all; also a symbol of physical attraction.
- Blue Lotus of Isis = in her RIGHT hand, held over her heart chakra =
  Universal Love found through the wellspring of the heart (the path is of the
  heart, not the head). Blue = water (her element), fertility, creativity.
  Lotus has 4 petals = CHESED = manifestation of Love from the divine into
  matter via that sephiroth.
- Arms curved as if holding an invisible baby to her breast = Isis nurturing
  Horus. MATER TRIUMPHANS (Isis Rejoicing): head looking downward, right hand
  pinches the left nipple, left hand cradles just below the solar plexus.
- Venus symbol = hidden within the shield, green (Venus) + white (spirit) field.
- White Rose = at base of throne = Venus, out of which come the waters of
  Universal Life, tinged green (Venus / fertility).
- Two fish = very small, swim in the waters = the feminine principle.
- Fleur-de-lys = lily of 3 petals bound near their bases = connection with
  Binah and the Holy Trinity; royalty, strength, courage through LOVE.

Alchemical attributes:
- Arms form a shape close to the alchemical symbol of SALT. She IS Salt — one
  of the three alchemical forms of energy (with Mercury and Sulphur). Salt =
  inactive part of Nature (Womb), stimulated by Sulphur; feminine, passive,
  solid, heavy, the vehicle for manifestation of energy into form.
  (Sulphur = Active, Salt = Passive, Mercury = Purity.)
- Pelican (lower left) = in medieval belief feeds its young with blood from its
  own heart; the Hé and Hé-final of the Tetragrammaton, continuity of life;
  represents an earlier Aeon (Osiris, self-sacrifice, subjugation of the
  feminine). Snuffin: Antimony is the catalyst purifying salt (the Empress),
  separating into white tincture (the shield) and impurities (the Pelican).
- Double-Headed Eagle on Shield = holds a WAXING MOON in its beaks (growth /
  New Aeon of Horus). Alchemical WHITE TINCTURE (female sexual fluids); the
  white eagle is consort to the red eagle in the Emperor.

(viii) Priestess to Empress Transition

From alignment with the soul's purpose (Priestess) to recognising the essential
nature of spirit as LOVE, purer than personal love. The doorway to Spirit is
Love, the channel for the HGA. The path is not of the mind (separation and
comparison) but of the heart. Practice acceptance — through acceptance,
transcendence. Crowley: "In no other card is it so necessary to disregard the
parts but concentrate upon the whole" (BoT p.77).

(ix) Divinatory Meanings

Upright: Birth (pregnancy), fertility. Being in touch with the beauty of your
life. Someone needing nurturing. Exploring the relationship with the mother. An
empathic, caring personality. In touch with universal love / spirit. Spirituality
expressed from the heart not the head. Time in nature. Nurturing others and
yourself. Connecting with love in meditation / spiritual practice.

Reversed: Vanity. Sexual/emotional manipulation. Unable to give or experience
love, emotionally damaged. Unresolved conflicts with the mother. Lack of
self-love. Unwanted pregnancy. Unable to connect with universal love on the
spiritual journey. Not enjoying spiritual work; conflicts.

Tags: daleth, double headed eagle, empress tarot card meaning, fleur de-lis,
path 14 illuminating intelligence, thoth tarot, tree of life qabalah, white
tincture
