Thoth Hermit Tarot Card Tutorial
Source: https://www.esotericmeanings.com/thoth-hermit-tarot-card-tutorial/
Saved: 2026-08-02 (local reference copy; content (c) esotericmeanings.com)
One file per card lives in reference/esoteric-meanings/, named <NN>-<slug>.txt

------------------------------------------------------------

(iv) The Hermit and The Tree of Life

The Hermit connects Chesed to Tiphareth, the 20th path. Chesed is on the pillar of
Mercy (masculine); Tiphareth is associated with Christ / sacrificial Gods and ruled by
the Sun (masculine). The idea of GROWTH is contained in the Hermit — Chesed constructive,
Geburah destructive.

(v) Hebrew and Elemental Attribution

Attributed to YOD, "the Hand," in the centre of the picture. Yod is the foundation of all
the other Hebrew letters (they are merely combinations of it). Crowley (Book of Thoth):
Yod is the first letter of Tetragrammaton, symbolizing the Father who is Wisdom; the
highest form of Mercury, the Logos, Creator of all worlds; his representative in physical
life is the spermatozoon — this is why the card is called The Hermit. Masculine, but by
its astrological attribution VIRGO it has a feminine side (body, health, personal
development). Mercury RULES and is EXALTED in Virgo. Mercury = Logos = the word/will of
God, implying CREATIVITY. Mercury guided souls of the dead through the underworld — a
psychopomp / mediator between living and dead (Persephone led back out of Hades). In
practical terms the Hermit is the Will of higher consciousness working silently to take us
out of the ignorance of Hades (lower consciousness); a call to step back and
introspect/contemplate (Virgo + Mercury). Virgo also associated with Prudence, hence
wisdom = Chokmah (the Father, same name Yod is given in Tetragrammaton).

(vi) Symbolism

Hermit = solitude and independence; wisdom imparted silently through connection with the
higher self, planted like a seed that bears fruit over time.
Yod shape of Hermit = Yod is the seed of the Tetragrammaton; the Hermit is the seed of
wisdom within man.
Wheat in background = agriculture, Virgo, Persephone; growth of wheat = growth of inner
wisdom; we are surrounded by the wisdom of our own contemplation.
Ibis head of Hermit = Ibis was associated with Thoth (Egyptian god of the written word).
Diamond lantern = a symbol of Kether. Tiphareth is the highest expression of Kether within
us (Christ = the Word of God manifested).
Sun = in the lantern covering the genitals (like the Fool), the Hermit using the Light of
spirit creatively to learn about himself. The Sun has 8 wavy + 8 straight rays; 8 links to
Hod (ruled by Mercury).
Four yellow rays from lantern = (1) energizes the spermatozoon (lower left), (2) the apex
of the pyramid, (3) illuminates Cerberus / lower nature (the dead phallus after
ejaculation), (4) points to the Orphic Egg (a fertilized egg with all the potential of
life) — a completed cycle.
Spermatozoon = the WAND of the Hermit, the potential of life.
Foetus in sperm cell = the old homunculus belief (a tiny complete human inside).
Diamond in spermatozoon = link to KETHER, spirit, purity. Kether connects to Tiphareth on
the middle pillar and the Sun.
Cerberus = three-headed dog, tamed by the Hermit, the three qualities of the lower self:
head forward, mouth open = SPEECH; middle head (higher) = THOUGHT (above action and
speech); head looking back = ACTION. Taming the lower self to be a vehicle for the higher.
Orphic Egg = the manifested universe, here the subjective universe of the individual; the
Hermit looks straight into it to learn about himself. Green = the colour of Venus (Netzach,
the opposite of Mercury/Hod).
Two rays of light at top = do NOT come from the lamp; white vs. the lamp's yellow.
Pyramid = formed by the top white ray; stands for the phallus, each corner energised by
lantern-rays (energization of the phallus from the creative potential of the sun).
Lower white ray = the horizon.

(viii) Numerology

The ninth card / key of wisdom. 9 always returns to itself (3x3=9; 9x2=18, 1+8=9; etc).
The axiom: there is only the self to return to for all answers; nothing lies outside the
self, yet that is where we tend to look for completion.

(ix) Adjustment to Hermit transition

Adjustment = the balance from the charioteer's actions; he cut away all that does not serve
to make room for what does. The Hermit withdraws within, forming a bridge between outer and
inner world; having removed what does not serve (Adjustment) and tamed the lower nature
(Cerberus), he becomes a better expression of spirituality in the world.

(x) Divinatory Meanings

Upright: Getting away from a situation to get better insight into it. Getting illumination
(lamp) and insight into a situation you were previously in the dark about. Spending time on
your own, withdrawing to your still inner centre; soul-searching for what gives life
meaning. The need to get in touch with untapped wisdom.

Reversed: The need to get out more into the world (too isolated / introspective); so
self-absorbed you ignore others' needs. Not in touch with your inner guide. Too much
secrecy, not open about yourself. Single but desiring a relationship, or in a relationship
and not having enough space to be alone for personal reflection.
