Thoth Star Tarot Card Tutorial
Source: https://www.esotericmeanings.com/thoth-star-tarot-card-tutorial/
Saved: 2026-08-01 (local reference copy; content (c) esotericmeanings.com)
One file per card lives in reference/esoteric-meanings/, named <NN>-<slug>.txt

------------------------------------------------------------

(ii) Thoth Star Tarot Card

A very beautiful card with a really positive meaning. The central figure is
the Goddess Nuith in form, which is different from her formless state as we
will see in the Aeon Card.

Crowley says in the Book of the Law: "Every Man and Every Woman is a Star"

The Book of the Law has 3 essential principles:

1. NUIT/NUITH - which is what the Star represents - the ETERNAL MOTHER as
the all encompassing UNITY of life, from which all possible manifestations
of creation come from. She represents all that can possibly be created or
will be.

2. HADIT - She cannot manifest anything without HADIT which is represented
by a winged globe; both are represented in the Stele of Revealing. Hadit is
essentially the ESSENCE OF KETHER, the first sephiroth on the Tree of Life.

3. HORUS - arises out of the union of Nuit and Hadit. Horus is
aggressive/destructive, almost like the judgement of Christ.

Going back to the Star - Crowley is saying we are all like Nuit in that we
have the potential of the universe inside us. The ALL POTENTIAL.

(iv) The Star and The Tree of Life

The Star has swapped paths on the Tree of Life with the Emperor, so we are
looking back up toward the top of the Tree at the path connecting Chokmah
to Tiphereth, crossing the abyss which separates the unmanifest supernal
triangle from the remaining sephira. Traditionally she has one foot on land
and the other on water, bridging the gap between formless (water) and form
(Earth).

(v) Hebrew and Astrological Attribution

A. Hebrew: the letter He ("window"). A window's main function is to
transmit light; the essence of the Star is that we are transmitters of
light on all levels - support and daily inspiration to others, or spiritual
illumination as we allow the divine to flow through us.

He occurs twice in the tetragrammaton:
  He Primal = the Great Mother (Circle or Nuit) in the background
  He Final  = her daughter the Princess (the figure in the foreground)
So the letter He is a FEMININE letter.

B. Astrology: ruled by Aquarius, which is ruled by Saturn. Saturn rules
Binah, the Great Mother on the Tree of Life. Aquarius is about the
individual and uniqueness with an overall humanitarian outlook; the Star
shares these qualities - the divinity and uniqueness within us, while
encouraging us to be a conduit for bringing down our highest potential.

Nuith = central figure; the manifested form of Nuit of Atu XX, the Aeon.

(vi) Symbolism of The Star

Golden Cup: Gold and the Sun are associated with God the Father. She pours
the limitless potential of God upon herself and becomes a conduit for that
energy to manifest (the Nuit/Hadit principles above). It is the water of
Universal Life - Biblically the WORD, meditated upon as Inner Light and
Sound.

Blue Seven-pointed Star of Venus: coming from the golden cup - the entire
universe is LOVE. The number 7 is associated with Venus as the seventh
sephiroth NETZACH is ruled by this planet.

Silver Cup: Moon and Illusion. As energy becomes manifest its purity is
lost, further from source. Nevertheless this is the blood of the Holy Grail
(Book of Thoth p.110), poured on the junction between land and water.
Crowley points out this cup issues energy which is LINEAR, not spiral like
the rest of the card. The mind of man is obsessed and blinded by geometry,
which blocks his spiritual vision.

Tetragrammaton links:
  Gold Cup  = Sun, Masculine, Yod, Chokmah (force impregnating)
  Silver Cup = Moon, Feminine, He, Binah
  These give rise to Vau and He Final, or manifestation.

Star of Babalon: upper left corner, with the number 7 drawn within it seven
times. Babalon is a secret name; it unites everything in this card as its
rays spiral out touching all the symbolism contained. Babalon is the Lady
of the City of Pyramids - the feminine complement to the Magus (though the
Priestess is usually seen this way). She is a channel for the inspiration
and energy of God.

At all times we have the unification of Hadit and Nuit, masculine and
feminine - the universe in a constant state of orgasm.

Although we have the divine spark within us it is often concealed behind
veils of protection - our life experiences and especially our traumas. The
Star speaks to us to rediscover our INSPIRATION within; to show the vision
of endless possibilities in front of us.

Globe: often mistaken for Earth but in fact the universe, of which Earth is
part. The Star of Venus spirals out to fill the whole globe. Venus is above
the Empress; the Empress gives birth to the child as Binah gives birth to
the Universe, and LOVE is common to both.

Crystalline Earth: the manifested world at the bottom of the card. 20
seven-sided translucent solids exhibiting the geometry of matter not found
in spiritual realms. 20 solids relate to YOD and The Hermit and the
potential to manifest all possibilities; the Hermit occupies the 20th path
between Chesed and Tiphereth and oversees the Royal Marriage in the Lovers.

5 Butterflies: right hand corner; liberated souls free of the trappings of
mind and matter. 5 represents spirit (after earth, water, fire, air). They
have traversed the Abyss to reach the Supernal Triangle.

3 Red Roses: beneath the butterflies; fertility. Roses are associated with
Venus and Love.

Sea of Binah: in the background, somewhat hidden. From this formless sea
the Universe comes into manifestation.

Pyramid City: far background, reached once the sea of Binah has been
crossed. Home of the Enlightened Souls.

(vii) Tower to Star Transition

As it follows the Tower: you have endured life's challenges and been
through a difficult time, but you are now open to following your dreams and
what inspires you. Your ability to let go has been strengthened by contact
with your true self through these difficult times. Hatred, envy, bitterness
and revenge have burned themselves out and no longer shadow your life. You
can practice forgiveness for yourself and others and embrace new
opportunities.

The transition is about moving from the trauma of grappling with and
hanging on to present thoughts, attitudes and identity in The Tower, to
letting them flow and just be there with acceptance and without struggle in
The Star.

Relevance to the path: in meditation it is easy to be caught up in
thinking. Rather than react against thoughts, let them go. By letting
thoughts and their attachments just "be", we find distance from them and
see them for what they are. "We are imprisoned by subtlety not obviousness."
The attachments are like the chains in The Devil card - so close we are
unaware we are (apparently) trapped. Attachments are broken by first using
detachment to accept they exist, then releasing ourselves from them.

Difficulties: hanging on to an old sense of who we are is like carrying a
bag full of the broken blocks of The Tower. Thoughts and attitudes do not
go away when suppressed. Forced, rigid meditation (trying not to think, and
thus just thinking) will not produce growth. The greatest difficulty may be
being too attached to our sense of who we are. There is also a danger of
yielding too much - losing all discipline and happily sitting thinking in
meditation all the time.

Practical advice: cultivate "beginner's mind" - look at any realisation or
situation fresh, without prejudice, desire or expectation. Respond with
insight rather than react with defensiveness, without losing principles and
self-discipline. Observe your reactions for insight into attachments -
strong reactions are opportunities to learn. Trust the light and sound,
your own process, and The Path. Polish the mind to a clean mirror. Look
beyond mind to see the potential of spirituality in everyone. Fulfilment
found in thinking is short-lived compared to what can be found in
meditation. Let go of the old sense of self and find the true Self.

(xiii) Divinatory Meanings

Upright:
1. Being fulfilled and inspired by life. A reminder to follow our dreams
   and that which gives us the most inspiration.
2. Being directed to express your spiritual side, joy and inspiration. Be
   open to love and trust the Universe and what it brings.
3. Encouragement: you have had testing times and now is the time to move
   forward with renewed hope and live an inspired life of full expression.

Reversed:
1. Loss of Hope and Faith which needs to be restored. Scepticism.
2. Disconnected from your spiritual side at the moment.
3. The need to address what is holding you back from being inspired by
   life, spiritually or in daily routine.
4. Lack of hope and joy in your life.
5. The need to find something more fulfilling and spiritual which has so
   far eluded you.
6. A situation which seems hopeless or in which you have lost faith; a
   difficult time in which your faith is being tested.
