 =a    ea ‘=   re   = v   v Pad I   ax   ts


of the world's most fascinating
    and magical tarot cards
                                         ea           ae daa
                                        = Ice he
                                        PIG AE eTT4
                                        NTAICA
                                             LA
                                        Lye               Fae a)
                                        [eicieee— Guile
mit, 1 tt 11 T Ye T it iimt it TT
Bato AS ast ele                          CANC
                                            A AGE
                                              E
Sent SE SR IID
                                        |aa CAV" eo
ae
                                                      Set ade


                     Ficure 2. Back OF THE THOTH TAROT.
  UNDERSTANDING
ALEISTER CROWLEYS


THOTH
TAROT


             This   One


             6GL2-HHN-Y316
  THEREFORE I SAY UNTO THEE: COME FORTH UNTO ME FROM
 THINE ABODE IN THE SILENCE, UNUTTERABLE Wispoo, ALL-
   LIGHT, ALL-POWER! THOTH, HERMEs, MERcurRY, ODIN, BY
WHATEVER NAME | CALL THEE, THOU ART STILL UN-NAMED AND
NAMELESS TO ETERNITY! COME THOU FORTH, I SAY, AND AID AND
             GUARD ME IN THIS Work OF ART.'
  UNDERSTANDING
ALEISTER CROWLEYS


THOTH
TAROT
Lon Mito DUQUETTE


   WEISERBOOKS
    Boston, MA/York Beach, ME
First published in 2003 by
Red Wheel/Weiser, LLC
York Beach, ME


With ofÏces at:
368 Congress Street
Boston, MA 02210
uw. redwheelwetser.com


Copyright © 2003 Lon Milo Duquette


All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or
by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any
information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from Red
Wheel/Weiser, LLC. Reviewers may quote brief passages.


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data


DuQuette, Lon Milo
  Understanding Aleister Crowley's thoth tarot / Lon Milo DuQuette.
          p. cm.

   Includes bibliographical references.
       ISBN 1-57863-276-5
       1. Tarot. 2. Crowley, Aleister, 1875-1947. I. Title.
   BF1879.T2D873 2003
   133.3'2424—dc22                                                                 2003014475

Typeset in the United States


Printed in Canada
TCP


10 09 08 07 06 05 04


8765432
THIS WORK IS LOVINGLY DEDICATED
     to Betty LUNDSTED.
                    CONTENTS
                             CA


                     List OF FIGURES xi

                     List OF TABLES Xiii

                    ACKNOWLEDGMENTS XV


                         Part ONE
            Littce Bits oF THINGS You SHOULD
            Know BErore BEGINNING TO STUDY
            ALEISTER CROWLEY'S THOTH TAROT 1


CHAPTER O   INTRODUCTION: THE Book or THOTH—
            A Macick Book?


CHAPTER I   Litre Birs or TH1ncs You SHouLD Know

CHAPTER 2 ALEISTER CROWLEY AND THE GOLDEN DAWN     II


CHAPTER 3 Tue Lapy AND THE BEAST                   14


CHAPTER 4 THe Arr                                  19
                                                   Contents


CHAPTER 5 THE PROPHET AND THE Book OF THE LAW           21


CHAPTER 6 Tue AEon oF Horus                            26


CHAPTER 7 THE VISION AND THE VOICE                     34


CHAPTER 8    SECRETS OF THE Rose Cross Back            38


CHAPTER 9    SECRETS OF THE TREE OF LIFE               58


CHAPTER Io Wor ps oF CoLor                             65

CHAPTER II Tue Hoty GuarDIAN ANGEL                     7O


                               Part Two
                             Tue Carbs 79


CHAPTER 12   INTRODUCTION TO THE CARDS                 81


CHAPTER 13   INTRODUCTION TO THE Major ARCANA          85

CHAPTER 14 Atu oF TAHUTI—THE Major ARCANA TRUMPS       95

             Atu O—The Fool                            96

             Atu I—The Magus                           99
             Atu II—The High Priestess                102


             Atu II—The Empress                       104


             Atu 1V—The Emperor                       106

             Atu V—The Hierophant                     109

             Atu VI—The Lovers                         112


             Atu VII—The Chariot                      114


             Atu Vill—Adjustment                       117


             Atu IX—The Hermit                        120


             Atu X—Fortune                            123


             Atu XI—Lust                              126

             Atu XIU—The Hanged Man                   128
Contents


             Atu Xill=Death                           11
             Atu XIV—Art                              134

             Atu XV—The Devil                         137
             Atu XVI—The Tower                        140


             Atu XVII—The Star                        143

             Atu XVUI—The Moon                        146

             Atu XIX—The Sun                          148

             Atu XX—Aeon                              150


             Atu XXI—The Universe                     153


CHAPTER 15 Tue Minor ARCANA                           161


CHAPTER 16   THE SPIRIT OF THE ACES                   162


CHAPTER 17 THE Four Aces

             Ace of Wands

             Ace of Cups

             Ace ofSwords

             Ace ofDisks


CHAPTER 18 THE Crazy Mixep-up Wor_Lp oF Court Carbs

             Knight of Wands

             Queen of Wands

             Prince of Wands

             Princess of Wands
             Knight of Cups

             Queen ofCups

             Prince ofCups

             Princess of Cups

             Knight ofSwords

             Queen ofSwords

             Prince ofSwords

             Princess ofSwords

             Knight ofDisks
                                                      Contents


             Queen ofDisks                              200

             Prince ofDisks                              202

             Princess ofDisks                            203


CHAPTER Ig   THE SMALL Carps                             205


             Wands                                       213

             Cups                                        224

             Swords                                     240

             Disks                                       245


CHAPTER 20 METHOD OF DIVINATION AND THE MEANINGS OF
             THE CARDS                                   274

CHAPTER 21   GLOSSARY OF THELEMIC AND TAROT TERMS       290


                                 NOTES 313

                              BIBLIOGRAPHY 328

                              PERMISSIONS 331
                              FIGURES

                                    A)


 Figure 1   The Stéle of Revealing (inside front cover)

 Figure 2   Back of the Thoth Tarot (inside front cover)

 Figure 3   Complete Hermetic Rose Cross (inside back cover)

 Figure 4   The point 40

 Figure 5   The cubic stone 41

 Figure 6   Construction of the cube 42

 Figure 7   Unfolded cube—The Golden Cross 43

 Figure 8   The Rose of five petals 43

 Figure 9   The Rose Cross of Being 44

Figure 10   Three Petals of the elemental trumps 45

Figure 11   Seven Petals of the planetary trumps 45

Figure 12   Twelve Petals of the zodiacal trumps 46

Figure 13   Rose Cross of Manifestation 46

Figure 14   The Four suits on the Rose Cross of Manifestation 48

Figure 15   The Pentagram—spirit rulership of the four elements 49

Figure 16   The Pentagram—the ace and the court cards 49

Figure 17   The court cards are elemental aspects of the ace 50

Figure 18   Four aces and sixteen court cards 51
                                                                        Figures


Figure 19   Elemental Pentagrams of the microcosm; planetary hexagram of
            the macrocosm; union of 5 and 6; the symbol of the great work
            accomplished 52

Figure 20   The completed Hermetic Rose Cross 53

Figure 21   The Tree of Life 59

Figure 22   The Pentagram of the Major and Minor Arcanas 83

Figure 23   Natural order of the zodiacal belt 89

Figure 24   Zodiacal belt with a twist 89

Figure 25   Zodiacal belt with two twists 91

Figure 26   The small cards embedded in the ace     163
                              TABLES

                                  wa


 Table 1   Division of the Hebrew Alphabet with Elemental, Planetary, and
           Zodiacal Correspondences 42

 Table 2   The Four Tarot Suits Ultimately Represent the Divine Name, Yod
           Hé Vau Hé, and Its Fourfold Division of Creation 48

 Table 3   Elemental Subdivisions of the Aces and Court Cards 50

 Table 4   Colors Attributed to the Trumps 67

 Table 5   Colors Attributed to the Small Cards 68

 Table 6   The Traditional Sequence Using the Titles of the Thoth Tarot and
           Golden Dawn Attributes 87

 Table 7   Golden Dawn Arrangement: The Natural Sequence of the Signs of
           the Zodiac and the Hebrew Alphabet Restored 88

 Table 8   Crowley Arrangement: The Natural Sequence of Signs Arranged to
           Accommodate the New Order 90

 Table 9   Small Cards Suits, Zodiac Signs and Elements   207

Table 10   Cardinal Signs, Fixed Signs, and Mutable Signs 207

Table 11   Small Cards in Four Repeating Patterns of 2 Through 10 208

Table 12   Progression of the Small Cards Through the Zodiacal Year 208

Table 13   Assignment of the Planets to the Small Cards 208

Table 14   The Court Cards Rule the Small Cards 209

Table 15   Princesses: Thrones of the Aces and Rulers of Quadrants
           of Space 209
                 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

                                      CA)


The author wishes to recognize and thank the following individuals for their friend-
ship, wisdom, and support: Constance Jean DuQuette, Judith Hawkins-Tillirson,
Rick Potter,Jody Breedlove, Hymenaeus Beta, Sabazius, James Wasserman, Bill
Heidrick, Carolyn Tillie, Donald Weiser, Clive Harper,Tim Maroney, Kat Sanborn,
and Donald Kraig. And to the brightest stars in the firmament of tarot:
    Janet Berres, Dr. Arthur Rosengarten, Stuart Kaplan, Mary Greer, Rachel
Pollack, Thalassa, Ruth Ann and Wald Amberstone, Linda Walters, Robert Place,
and Bob O'Neil. Finally, I give special (and most humble) thanks to mydear Brother,
Dathan Biberstein, who revealed to me the mystery of the Kerubic emblems of the
Thoth Tarot—a mystery that taunted me for over thirty years.
           PART I


Little Bits of Things You Should

Know Before Beginning to Study

 Aleister Crowleys Thoth Tarot
                            CHAPTER                      ZERO

                                              Cc)
                   THE BOOK OF THOTH—
                           A MAGICK BOOK?


     The Tarot isapack ofseventy-eight cards. There are four suits, as in modern playing
    cards, which are derived
                          from it. But the Court cards number four instead of three. In
    addition, there are twenty-two cards called “Trumps,” each ofwhich ts a symbolic
    picture with
               a title
                     to stself.
           At first sight one would suppose this arrangement to be arbitrary, but t 1s not. It
    is necessitated, as will appear later, by the structure
                                                        of the universe, and in particular
    the Solar System, as symbolized by the Holy Qabalah. This will be explained in due
    course.'


These are the brilliantly concise opening words of Aleister Crowley's       The Book of
Thoth. When I first read them, I was filled with great expectations. At last, I thought,
the great mysteries of the Thoth Tarot are going to be explained to me—“in due
course.”
    At the time, I considered myself a serious student of tarot, having spent three
years studying the marvelous works of Paul Foster Case and his Builders ofthe
Adytum tarot and Qabalah courses. As dictated in the B.O.T.A. curriculum, I
painted my own deck of trumps and dutifully followed the meditative exercises out-
lined for each of the twenty-two cards. Now, with Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot
and The Book of Thoth in hand,I knew I was ready to take the next step toward tarot
mastery and my own spiritual illumination.
    It took a bit of bravado on my part to arrive at this threshold. My first intro-
duction to Crowley had not been particularly satisfying. In fact, I came very close
to shunning the Thoth Tarot and The Book of
                                         Thoth as seductive works of the devil.
I wrote about this embarrassing episode in my book, My Life with the Spirits.*
4                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


    Eventually, I came upon an early edition of Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot
    deck. I had never seen anything so beautiful in my life. The name Aleister
    Crowley sounded familiar and I vaguely recalled seeing his name footnoted
    in a Qabalah book that I had read by Frater Achad. I referred to my occult
    dictionary and discovered to my horror—“Aleister Crowley—famous
    Scottish Satanist.”
         I may have been a wild and crazy heretic, but I sure didn’t want any-
    thing to do with Satanism. Knowing my brother owned a copy of The Book
    ofThoth (the companion text), I promptly gave the cards to him. Good rid-
    dance!
         I was soundly disabused of this notion a few days later by our dear
    friend Mad Bob (a name that only begins to describe his bizarre and won-
    derful character), who had returned briefly from a Central American adven-
    ture. Bob had read Crowley's autobiography‘ and insisted I would love the
    man if I gave him a chance. When I showed him what the occult dictionary
    had to say, he brushed it off saying, “It doesn't matter if Crowley was a
    Satanist, he was a good kind of Satanist. You'll just love him! Trust me.”
         That was the strangest thing I had ever heard, but I respected Mad
    Bob's opinion and took the cards back from my brother and asked to borrow
    his Book ofThoth. Bob was right. Even though I didn’t understand most of
    what I read, I could see that Aleister Crowley was brilliant, funny, and every-
    thing I was looking for. I bought everything I could by or concerning the
    man (precious little in those days) and eventually wrote to Crowley’s Ordo
    Templi Orientis (O.T.O.)at the address published on the Caliph card
    included in the Thoth Tarot to ask for initiation.


    And so began what (for good or ill) I must call my magical career.The Thoth
Tarot being not only the catalyst that triggered my metamorphosis from dilettante
to magician, but also the talisman that obligingly provided the mailing address of
the Holy Order that would remain my spiritual home and university for the next
quarter century.

    Please don't think that by relating the above story I am suggesting that every-
one who wishes to understand more about the Thoth Tarot orThe Book of Thoth
need run right out and join the O.T.O.or any other group, magical or otherwise.
Occult societies are not for everybody, and no matter what any of them may sug-
gest to new or potential members, no organization has yet cornered the market on
the wisdom of the ages. In fact, all the information one will ever need in order to
master the subject has already been published and is readily available—more avail-
able, in fact, than at any other time in history. At the dawn of the new millennium,
it is not a matter of whether or not the answers are out there, rather it is a matter
of arriving at a place where one knows the right questions to ask.
The Book of
         Thoth—a Magick Book?                                                             5


     Naturally, because no two individuals are alike, we should not expect to find
the answers in the same places. For me, the answers most often come, not from
teachers or from mystery school lectures, but from books—books, curiously enough,
that I have already read (or thought I read) many times before.
     Crowley's Book of Thoth is one such book. It seems to change miraculously as
it rests on the shelf. I can say with certainty that, in the last thirty years, I have read
it cover-to-cover at least a dozen times, and have referred to it hundreds of times.
Yet every time I pick it up, I find something profound that I have never seen before.
More often than not, this new intelligence is precisely that bit of information I
have been combing my brain or library for, or else it satisfies some spiritual frustration
currently gnawing at my soul.
     I used to blame this phenomenon on the fact that I am a slow learner and need
to have something drummed into my head many times before I start to “get it.”
Nevertheless, over the years, I have spoken to so many students who tell me that the
same thing happens to them (especially with books by Aleister Crowley) that I
believe it to be a universal experience.
     Of course, I don't believe that the words on the page actually metamorphose
into different words between readings. Nor can I bring myself
                                                           to think that I am care-
less enough to leave unread great chunks of a book I passionately want to understand.
Rather, I have come to realize that it is me who changes between readings, and that
the magical secret to learning more than I now know lies in my ability to become
someone who is more than I now am.
     For this reason,
                    I strongly recommend that, if you are truly serious about your
study of the tarot, you not only read The Book of Thoth but reread it regularly. Leave
it off the shelf and refer to it often. Keep rereading it until it falls apart in your
hands, then go out and buy a new one. It will be a different book every time you pick
it up. It is a magick book. Respect it. Treasure it. Let it work its magick on you—
not so much for the reward of learning more than you now know, but for sake of your
spiritual destiny to become someone greater than you now are.
    The idea that I should write an exegetic text on the Thoth Tarot and The Book
of Thoth was first suggested by Miss Judith Hawkins-T illirson’ at an informal meet-
ing with me, Donald Weiser, and Betty Lundsted of
                                                Weiser Books. Judith’s propo-
sition came as a complete surprise to me, and I sat speechless throughout most of her
pitch. She pointed out the fact that, other than
                                              The Book of
                                                       Thoth itself, there was no
book that examined the Thoth Tarot from the point of view of a Crowley “expert.”
     She went on for only two or three minutes. When she was finished, she sat
back in her chair and grinned at me. Don and Betty agreed that the book was a
good idea and that I should send them some preliminary material. That was that.
I had hardly spoken a word. I went back to my hotel and stared out the window at
a glorious Chicago thunderstorm and asked myself, “What in the world have I
gotten myself into?”
6                                            Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


     While the definition of the term “expert” is certainly open to debate, it is prob-
ably at least partially true that my credentials to comment on the subject are as pre-
sentable as anyone's. However, I must warn the reader that my understanding of
Crowley, Thelema, and tarot is constantly changing. No matter how smugly secure
I may appear in my theories and opinions, please keep in mind that I am perpetu-
ally reexamining my theories and changing my opinions. I counsel you to be pre-
pared to do the same.
                             CHAPTER ONE

                                            C7)
                  LITTLE BITS OF THINGS
                      YOU SHOULD KNOW


    It seems important that you should understand my motive. To me this Work on the
    Tarot is an Encyclopaedia ofall serious “occult”philosophy. It is a standard Book of
    Reference, which will determine the entire course ofmystical and magical thoughtfor
    the next 2000 years. My one anxiety
                                    is that it should
                                                 be saved from danger
                                                                   of
    destruction, by being reproduced in permanentform, and distributed in as many
    distant places as may be. | am not anxious to profitfinancially; ifI bad the capital
    available tn this country, I should send (say) 200 copies to State Libraries in allparts
    ofthe world, and as many more to my principal representatives.
                   —Aleister Crowley to Mr. Pearson, Photoengraver, May 29, 1942.


Every year since 1969, when the first color edition appeared in bookstores and spe-
cialty shops worldwide, Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot has remained one of the
best-selling tarot decks in the world. This is not surprising. In my opinion, it is
quite simply the most stunningly beautiful deck of tarot cards ever created. It took
the artist, the immensely talented Frieda Harris,’ over five years (1938-1943) to com-
plete the seventy-eight surrealistic masterpieces.
    Today,
      the images remain as hauntingly evocative as when they were first exhib-
ited. The popularity of the cards, however, shines in bright contrast to the black
reputation of the man who designed them and who relentlessly dictated every aspect
of their execution—a man maligned during his lifetime as a black magician, and
branded by the press “the wickedest man in the world.”
    Paradoxes seem to define the life and career of Edward Alexander (Aleister)
Crowley.’ Yes, in many ways he was a scoundrel. There is no doubt that he wal-
lowed shamelessly in his carefully cultivated persona as England's literary and spir-
itual bad-boy. At the same time, he took life and himself very seriously. Among
8                                             Understanding Aleister Crowley’ Thoth Tarot


other distinctions, he was a world-class mountaineer,” chess master, painter, poet,
sportsman, novelist, critic, and theatrical producer. He introduced America to astrol-
ogy," Isadora Duncan to the J Ching, and the poet Victor Neuberg to hiking and
high magick. As an agent provocateur writing for an English-language German
propaganda newspaper in New York, he penned the outrageous and inflammatory
editorials that provoked a reluctant United States Congress to enter World War I
on England's side.”
    During World War II, at the request of friend and Naval Intelligence ofÏcer
Ian Fleming, Crowley provided Winston Churchill with valuable insights into
the superstitions and magical mind-set of the leaders of the Third Reich. He also
suggested to the prime minister, if reports can be believed, that he exploit the enemy's
magical paranoia by being photographed as much as possible giving the two-fingered
“V-for-Victory” gesture. This sign is the manual version of the magical sign of
Apophis-Typhon, a powerful symbol of destruction and annihilationwhich, accord-
ing to magical tradition, is capable of defeating the solar energies represented by
the swastika.
    Astonishingly, Crowley's adventures and achievements—more than any dozen
men of ambition and genius could realistically hope to garner in a lifetime—seem
almost to be distractions when weighed against his monumental exploits of self-
discovery. His visionary writings and his efforts to synthesize and integrate the eso-
teric spiritual systems of East and West" make him one of the most fascinating
cultural and religious figures of the twentieth century.
    Even though his highly esoteric (and often ponderous) writings today enjoy a
level of readership and appreciation never approached during his lifetime, the
number of aspirants willing to take up serious study of his Scientific Illuminism
remains relatively small. For those daring and tenacious students, his Thoth Tarot
becomes the cornerstone of their study—a priceless and indispensable treasure. It
is nothing less than a full-color visual textbook of the wisdom of the ages—a living
talisman that distills, in breathtaking pageantry, the essence of the spiritual educa-
tion and insights of a modern master of the ancient mysteries. Is it any wonder that
such a rare and radiant magical device should cast an irresistible spell upon nearly
everyone with whom it comes in contact? For me, the answer is obvious. However,
I think it is also fair to ask if it is possible for someone to use and enjoy the Thoth
Tarot, even if they have absolutely no interest in Crowley or the Qabalistic, astro-
logical, and magical aspects of the cards.
    My answer is an unequivocal “Yes!” The Thoth Tarot happens to be the pre-
ferred deck of thousands of tarot collectors, students, and amateur and professional
readers all over the world.'* Most with whom I have spoken tell me they choose
the deck because of its haunting beauty and its efÏcacy as a divinatory tool. Those
who know something about Crowley and his work are usually polarized in their
opinions, but even those who consider him a perfectly dreadful individual still main-
Little Bits of Things You Should Know                                                  9


tain a healthy admiration for the cards. I was once assailed by a venerable tarot
reader who voiced the opinion shared by many professional readers and fans of the
Thoth Tarot: “I don’t care who Aleister Crowley was, and I don’t believe in his
magick. | just knowI like those damned cards and they work!”
    While it is undoubtedly true that only a small percentage of owners and users
of the Thoth Tarot will ever fully appreciate the esoteric value of the cards, it is also
abundantly clear to me that there are a great many people who would sincerely like
to know more about them. If you find yourself in this group of seekers, this book
is for you.
     In recent years, several fine books have been published that use the Thoth
Tarot as illustrations. By and large, these books pay respectful attention to the
more obvious features of the cards. They are good tarot books in their own right,
but they do not, in my opinion, deal satisfactorily with the profound concepts and
revelations that make the Thoth Tarot so unique and important. There is, however,
one book that does. It is a magnificent work written by the only person truly qual-
ified to comment authoritatively on the cards. The singular shortcoming of this
magnum opus, however, is not that it doesn't tell us enough—but that it tries to
tells us everything.
    Toward the end of his life, Crowley (writing as The Master Therion) wrote
one of his greatest works, The Book of Thoth—A Short Essay on the Tarot of the
Egyptians.* He intended it as an “elementary treatise” on tarot in general and the
Thoth Tarot in particular. As anyone who has read it, or attempted to read it, will
tell you, it is anything but elementary. In fact, unless one is already extremely knowl-
edgeable in the fields of mythology, philosophy, and religion, unless one is thor-
oughly steeped in the doctrines of the Hebrew Qabalah, unless one is intimately
familiar with the immense body of magical and visionary work that occupied Crowley
for nearly fifty years, unless one is fluent in the complex and enigmatic nomencla-
ture these visions spawned, The Book of Thoth is most definitely not a user-friendly
exposition of the Thoth Tarot.
     This is not to say that the uninitiated cannot benefit from reading it. On the
contrary, there is much in the text that is immediately comprehensible, indeed, pro-
foundly inspirational. Nevertheless, if it is the reader’s desire to gain some practi-
cal information about the Thoth Tarot quickly, he or she will most likely not read
past the seventh paragraph:


     One important interpretation of Tarot is that it is a Notarigon of the
     Hebrew Torah, the Law; also of ThROA, the Gate. Now, by the Yetziratic
     attributions—see table at end—this word may be read The Universe—the
     new-born Sun—Zero. This is the true Magical Doctrine of Thelema: Zero
     equals Two. Also, by Gematria, the numerical value of ThROA is 671 = 61 x
     11. Now 61 is AIN, Nothing or Zero; and 11 is the number of Magical
10                                             Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


     Expansion; in this way also, therefore, ThROA announces that same dogma,
     the only satisfactory philosophical explanation of the Cosmos, its origin,
     mode, and object.”

     Please do not think that I am deriding the content of the above statement. It
is remarkably lucid and perfectly Crowley. I understand it (to a degree) and, given
enough time (with breaks for meals), could explain it to any reasonably intelligent
person. However,whenI first read it nearly thirty years ago, it made absolutely no
sense to me. I knew nothing about Qabalistic world subdivisions, Enochian Aethyrs,
or magical societies. I couldn’t get through one page of The Book ofThoth without
encountering references to things I knew nothing about and reference books I did
not possess.

     Lady Harris was equally overwhelmed, and voiced her frustration in a January
1939 letter to Crowley.


     In reference to your books—I suppose you know that most of them would
     be easier for a beginner written in Sanscrit and that anyone reading them
     would go off their heads. Therefore the wise (like myself) take them in
     snappy bits and only when they are feeling strong.”


     So it is with much of The Book of
                                    Thoth. It is a masterpiece without equal, and
the perfect companion to the Thoth Tarot. While the latter can be appreciated the
moment the cards are taken out of the box, however, the former demands a signif-
icant investment of time and study.
     It would be many years before I realized that, had I known only just a little bit
about the magical life of Aleister Crowley,just a little bit about his revolutionary spir-
itual world-view and prophetic visions, just a little bit about astrology,
                                                                       just a little
bit about the Qabalah, just a little bit about alchemy, just a little bit about the Golden
Dawn and the Tree of Life, then The Book of
                                         Thoth and the Thoth Tarot cards would
soon have yielded many of their most important mysteries. What I needed was
another book—a book that might have been titled Little Bits of
                                                            Things You Should
Know before Beginning Your Study of Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot.
   Unfortunately for me, no such book existed at the time. Hopefully, one does now.
                           CHAPTER TWO

                                          CA)
         ALEISTER CROWLEY AND THE
                           GOLDEN DAWN


    Beyond all other mundane events it was the influence ofthe Hermetic Order ofthe
    Golden Dawn that shaped Aleister Crowley's life. Once exposed to tts Qabalistic system
    ofgrades andphilosophy, its magicalpractices and ceremonies be was never the same.”


Obviously, for us to begin to understand Aleister Crowley’s Thoth Tarot, we should
first knowa little bit about Aleister Crowley. Not forgetting my words in the pre-
vious chapter concerning the helpfulness of “little bits” of information, I must con-
fess that, when the subject is Aleister Crowley, a little bit of knowledge can be a
very dangerous thing. Those knowing just a little bit about the man vilified him
mercilessly during his life and continue to do so to this day. On the other side of the
coin, there are those who know just a little bit about Crowley who become instant
“true believers.” They emulate his every perceived prejudice and vice and zealously
worship him as if he were an omniscient and unerring god. Both views are dan-
gerously flawed. Make no mistake about it: a person needs an enormous amount
of information in order to arrive at a fair and reasonable understanding of this com-
plex and remarkable character.
    Unfortunately, space will not allow us a thorough examination and proper
defense of the seventy-two-year adventure that was the colorful life of Aleister
Crowley. For those of you who wish to take a more in-depth look, there are four
biographies that I do not hesitate to recommend.” They are included in the bibli-
ography at the end of this volume.
    Understandably, many of you will not care (or be able) to research these texts,
nor should this gap in your Crowley education prevent you from using and enjoy-
ing the Thoth Tarot. I truly wish I could break every rule of literary decorum and
simply say something like: Please trust me on this, folks. I know an awful lot about
12                                           Understanding Aletster Crowley’s Thoth Tarot


Crowley. He wasn't perfect. In fact, he could be perfectly horrible! But despite his
outrageous behavior and many shortcomings, his spiritual quest was as sincere, as
genuine, and as successful as any ever recorded. In this respect, he was in a very real
sense a holy man. Within the mountains of written material he left behind there are
priceless treasures waiting to be discovered by anyone willing to dig for them.
     Aleister Crowley was born Edward Alexander Crowley on October 12, 1875,
at Leamington, Warwickshire, England, to Edward Crowley, a wealthy brewer, and
Emily Bertha Bishop. His father was a follower of John Nelson Darby and a lay
preacher for the extremely conservative Plymouth Brethren Protestant sect. His
mother was an enthusiastic (Crowley wrote “fanatical”) member of the same.
     Young Alex was a sickly child and endeavored to overcome his health defi-
ciencies by hiking and rock climbing. He was educated by a number of private tutors
and private schools, including Malvern College, Tonbridge, Eastbourne College,
King’s College, London, and finally Trinity College, Cambridge.
     At Cambridge, he blossomed into a prolific poet and developed a keen inter-
est in alchemy and all things mysterious and occult. In November of 1898, he offered
himself for initiation into the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn in London,
taking the motto “Perdurabo,” meaning “I shall endure to the end.” This is an allu-
sion to Matthew 10:22, that is chillingly prophetic of the future that lay before
young Crowley: “And ye shall be hated of all men for my name's sake: but he that
endureth to the end shall be saved.””!
     Although he would be instrumental in breaking it up just a few years later, the
structure and teachings of the Golden Dawn would remain a major influence
throughout his life. It would also, quite literally, provide the blueprint for his per-
sonal spiritual evolution. As we will soon see, the Golden Dawn's Equinox cere-
mony (when the Hierophant steps down and a new one is installed) foreshadowed
a most profound cosmic event—but more on that later.
     In the Golden Dawn's fifth degree (Adeptus Minor), the new initiate is required
to paint his or her own deck of tarot cards modeled after one loaned to him or her
by the Order.The model deck was almost certainly designed by the Order's master
adept, S. L. MacGregor Mathers, and painted by his artist wife, Moina.
     For less than a dozen years, this deck had been the most esoteric and secret
pack of cards in existence. Candidates were bound by the most solemn and terri-
ble oaths never to reveal the secret correspondences and images. Crowley, as part of
his Adeptus Minor duties, most assuredly created his own, and the images of the
Thoth Tarot are based solidly upon those of the Golden Dawn model. Later, when
I discuss the individual cards, I will make repeated references to these original
designs.
     The Golden Dawn degree system is based upon the Qabalistic schema called
the Tree of Life (see figure 21, chapter 9). This diagram will become very impor-
tant to us in our study of the Thoth Tarot and the initiatory career of its creator.
Aleister Crowley and the Golden Dawn                                                  3


The Tree of Life consists of ten sephiroth,*—emanations from (or aspects of) the
supreme being. These ten sephiroth can be considered levels of consciousness—
the lowest (10) being that of the material plane, the highest (1) being the supreme
consciousness of deity. In the course of our incarnation adventures, each of us, in one
way or another, eventually “climbs” this tree, gaining ever more subtle levels of con-
sciousness, until we finally achieve union with godhead and supreme spiritual lib-
eration.
    The tarot is a perfect representation of the Tree of Life. The ace of each suit rep-
resents the top sephira (1) and the two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, and
ten of each suit represents its respective sephira on the Tree.
    There are also twenty-two paths that connect the ten sephiroth and facilitate
the candidate’s climb up the tree. These twenty-two paths are represented in tarot
by the twenty-two trump cards. We will discuss the Tree of Life in more detail in
chapter 9. Here it is only necessary to remember that the ten sephiroth and twenty-
two paths of the Tree of Life are the keys to understanding the magical life and
career of Aleister Crowley, as well as the key to understanding the Thoth Tarot.
                            CHAPTER THREE

                                                 C7)
              THE LADY AND THE BEAST


    Don't, Aleister, say “like me a little.”   If I may aspire to such a position, you are my
    friend and when myfriends are rude to me I cannot remember it. They remain the
    cone, the eye, the node,from which ts generated all the pleasure I have in life.”
                                                      —Harris to Crowley, January 28, 1940.


Was Frieda Harris a Lady? Of course she was, but the first little bit of information
we should learn about her concerns her use of the title “Lady.” She is almost always
referred to in print as “Lady Frieda Harris.” This is not technically correct, however.
British book antiquarian and Crowley/Harris scholar Clive Harper wrote me the
following:


    Percy Harris was made a baronet in 1932 (a baronetcy can be thought of as
    an inheritable “Sir .. .” title). He was appointed to the Privy Council in
     1940 and so became entitled to be called “The Right Honourable . ..” but
    strictly speaking this is an ofÏce, rather than an honour. The wife of a
    baronet is indeed a “Lady” but as the wife of Sir Percy Harris, she should
    have been known as “Lady Harris.” “Lady Frieda Harris” would only be
    correct if she was, for example, the daughter of a duke and so entitled to a
    courtesy title through her father. If she had divorced her husband she would
    be properly called, “Frieda, Lady Harris.” Now it is clear that she herself
    used “Lady Frieda Harris” and she would certainly have known the protocol
    for such things. One can but suspect that she was not averse to letting
    people assume that she came from a noble family, rather than being merely
    the estranged wife of a baronet.”
The Lady and the Beast                                                                 15


    There is very little information available concerning the personal relationship
that existed between Lady Harris and Aleister Crowley. In my mind, it is a story that
perhaps could only have been written by E. M. Forrester and filmed by Merchant-
Ivory. I can imagine the movie trailer . . . cue the string quartet!

    Freethinking London socialite and surrealist painter, Frieda Harris, wife of
    The Right Honourable Sir Percy Alfred Harris, M. P. (powerful Chief
    Whip of the Liberal Parliamentary Party) mysteriously falls under the spell
    of the notorious black magician Aleister Crowley, the most vilified and
    despised man in England. Ignoring the possible social consequences, she
    becomes his magical disciple* and agrees to focus her immense talent on a
    strange and monumental task. She would, under his domination, manifest in
    seventy-eight watercolor paintings his awesome, sometimes terrifying vision
    of the magical and spiritual forces of nature projected though the ancient
    archetypal images of the tarot.


    True to the art-film milieu, the climax of this melodrama is played out against
the chaotic backdrop of wartime London—the troop trains, the rationing, the sirens,
the blitz, the blackouts—it really is too romantic for words.
     It wasn't exactly like that, however. First, to be fair to the memories of these two
brilliant and colorful characters, we must remember that they were both in their
sixties. Rumors notwithstanding, Crowley's failing health and Lady Harris's extremely
visible social calendar made it highly unlikely their collaboration was one mad and
titillating adulterous romp.
       Second, it was Harris, not Crowley, who first suggested that he redesign the tra-
ditional tarot images and write a book about it, which she would illustrate with
seventy-eight paintings. Crowley flatly refused, suggesting simply that they “get
hold of the best available old pack and have them re-drawn with occasional cor-
rections and emendations.”* A project like that, he speculated, would take only six
months to complete. Harris was adamant, however. She insisted upon painting
entirely new tarot images that would illustrate a comprehensive new book from
Crowley. She eventually made Crowley an offer he couldn't refuse. She would pay
him a weekly stipend of£2 a week to teach her magick. Crowley was bankrupt. He
acquiesced.
    Harris was introduced to Crowley by artist friend and London socialite Greta
Valentine. They were all mutual friends of Clifford Bax, former coeditor of the lit-
erary and art magazine
                    The Golden Hind.
     Harris was a Co-Mason” and no stranger to esoteric subjects and ritual work,
but at the beginning of the project, she was a complete magical novice and by no
means a tarot expert. Nonetheless, she said she felt impelled by her Holy Guardian
Ange!” to create images that most accurately conveyed the deepest magical and
16                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


spiritual meaning of each card. She thoroughly acquainted herself with the tradi-
tional tarot images and the descriptions found in The Equinox.” She worked tire-
lessly from Crowley's sketches and notes, and thought nothing of repainting a single
card as many as eight times to satisfy his demands.
     Crowley, displaying an uncharacteristic level of gracious candor, readily admit-
ted that Harris’s genius forced him to apprehend each card as an individual mas-
terpiece, and that her energy, not his, was the impetus that saw the enormous
undertaking through to completion. It was truly a dynamic partnership of two bril-
lant and intensely motivated artists.
     But did Crowley, who fancied himselfa good intuitive painter, try to influence
Harris's style in executing the cards? The answer is “yes,” especially early in the
project, when it was obvious that Frieda was bent ona level of expression that might
have rendered the Thoth deck unrecognizable as tarot. Crowley’s December 19,
1939, note to Harris concerning her work on Adjustment and her fear of painting
faces gives us an idea ofthe direction the Thoth Tarot might have taken
                                                                    had Crowley
not put his foot down. He also, with typical Crowley hyperbole, tears into her circle
of friends, who were currently influencing her artistic attitudes:


     Your feeling about having no forms and faces is merely symptomatic of
     modern soul-sickness. It is lack of confidence in one's creative powers. It is
     the root of homosexuality as understood in this country and of all these
     crazy movements, the Neo-Thomists, and the Buchmanites and the
     Dadaists and the Surrealists. Picasso took it far enough; he tried to paint a
     chair which could not be any particular chair, and must therefore have no
     colour and no form, but as every chair, in order to be a chair, must have a
     support for the human frame, he did a horizontal line. But this is meta-
     physics and not art; all these half-sexed, half-witted people, sicklied o’er with
     the pale caste of thought, I cannot believe that any of them will ever com-
     mand either the Exeter, the Ajax or the Achilles, and any man who is not
     potentially capable of doing that, is not a man at all; he may be some kind of
     pudding, and I hold no brief against puddings, but all these people who
     resent simplicity resent manhood, they weave their own onanistic web of
     nastiness; these are the shells cast off from the Tree of Life, these are the
     larvae of abomination. It has been your evil fortune to have far too much to
     do with such people without a proper clinical training, such as would have
     enabled you to diagnose their malady; they have small orts of cleverness
     without any breadth of vision or balance, without the sense of space, of
     nature, of fresh air.
          ... 1 must emphasise that this fear of faces is an appalling symptom of
     cowardice. It is surely a natural instinct to connect expression with moral
     ideas, and it is moral ideas, or more correctly magical ideas, that you are out
The Lady and the Beast                                                                17


    to illustrate. It did not matter so much in this particular card because of the
    tradition ofJustice being blind, but on the other hand, the masking of the
    face suggests deceit which is the absolute opposite of the intention of the
    card; it was the familiars of the Inquisition, it was the Vehmgericht that
    administered what they called Justice, hooded. Impartiality is a lovely idea,
    but it doesn’t get you very far; if the impartial person may be impersonated
    by a demon of malignant darkness.”


    Why don't you tell us how you really feel, Mr. Crowley!
    Lady Harris exhibited the paintings on at least three occasions; first in June
1941 at the Randolph Hotel in Oxford, then again in July 1942 at the Berkeley
Galleries on Davis Street, London, and in August 1942 at the Royal Society of
Painters in Water Colours on Conduit Street, London. At Harris's insistence, Crowley
was not in attendance, nor does his name appear anywhere in the program essays.”
    In 1944, Crowley published the first edition of The Book of Thoth, the textbook
the cards were to illuminate. Assisting him financially with this project and several
others was a young American soldier, Lieutenant Grady L. McMurtry,” a member
of Crowley's magical order, Ordo Templi Orientis. In 1969, he would also be instru-
mental in arranging to have the seventy-eight paintings photographed and pub-
lished as a deck of tarot cards.*
    McMurtry was the only person I have ever talked to who actually met Lady
Harris. He first met her at Crowley’s flat at 93 Jermyn Street, Piccadilly. Shortly
afterward, Crowley moved out of the city to Buckinghamshire. McMurtry and
Harris would meet once again at her home in London. It was a brief encounter,
but his description of the event (which I heard him recount at least a half-dozen
times) is such a charming peek at Harris's character and so indicative of the milieu
of the times that I cannot resist attempting to retell it here. I hope Crowley biog-
raphers will forgive if my recollection of McMurty’s oft-told story differs with their
understanding of objective history.
    It was in late May 1944, less than two weeks before he would be part of the
D-Day Normandy invasion. Lieutenant McMurtry visited Crowley at his home at
the Bell Inn in Aston Clinton in Buckinghamshire. Because McMurtry had access
to a jeep and petrol, Crowley asked him if he could deliver some papers to Lady
Harris in London. Excited at the thought of seeing Harris again, he readily agreed.
    It was early evening and the city was blacked out by the time he reached the
Harris residence at 3 Devonshire
                         Terrace, Marylebone High Street.
                                                    As he approached
the door, he heard piano music and the sweet notes of Debussy’s “Claire de Lune”
from inside the Harris home. (McMurtry told me he remembered thinking what
an awkward contrast he made—a lanky American soldier in jump boots standing
at the door of this genteel gathering.) He knocked, and soon a man dressed in
eveningwear opened the door. It was obvious there was a party in progress; a pianist
18                                          Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


was entertaining guests. McMurtry stated his business and was asked to wait out-
side the door. In a few moments, Lady Harris opened the door, greeted him politely,
and accepted the paperwork with thanks. Then, as she was about to close the door
in his face, she turned her head for a moment and gazed upon the bright warmth
of her party—the quiet talk, the Debussy. For a moment, McMurtry was sure she
was going to invite him in. Then she turned to look at him, in his uniform and
boots, and said, “You do understand, of course, | can't invite you in. It would so
spoil the mood of the evening.”
     Contrary to absurd published statements that Crowley grew rich from the sales
of the Thoth Tarot while Lady Harris went unrecognized and unpaid, neither Harris
nor Crowley would live to profit financially from the project, or even see the paint-
ings properly manifested as tarot cards.“ Crowley died in December of 1947. Harris
visited him a few days before he died. He did not recognize her. She became a co-
executor of his will and was among the handful of people who attended his funeral.
She also hosted a lavish “curry” wake in his honor in her home in London.
     After the death of Sir Percy in 1952, Frieda, Lady Harris moved to Srinagar
Kashmir to live out her years on a houseboat, her modest income supplemented by
the sale of her paintings and writings. Contrary to rumors, the Lady did not die
impoverished, nor did she regret her relationship with the Beast. In a 1958 letter to
a friend in England, as she describes the virtues and vices of a Kashmiri gentleman
friend named Shabau, she fondly contrasts his character with her memories of
Crowley.

     But there is Shabau who remains. He is incapable of telling the truth except
     about God which I can't prove anyhow, but how charming he is, although
     sometimes I weary of his naive interpretations & moral narrowness & long
     for A. C. who was so d—d clever & without limitations.”*


     Frieda Harris died in 1962. Crowley, who was noted for rarely saying anything
nice about anyone, paid uncharacteristic tribute to her with adulation in the biog-
raphical note from The Book of Thoth:


     She devoted her genius to the Work. With incredible rapidity she picked up
     the rhythm, and with inexhaustible patience submitted to the correction of
     the fanatical slave-driver that she had invoked, often painting the same card
     as many as eight times until it measured up to his Vanadium Steel yardstick!
     May the passionate “love under will” which she has stored in this Treasury of
     Truth and Beauty flow forth from the Splendour and Strength of her work
     to enlighten the world; may this Tarot serve as a chart for the bold seamen
     of the New Aeon, to guide them across the Great Sea of Understanding to
     the City of the Pyramids!*
                           CHAPTER                      FOUR

                                            C7)
                                     THE ART


     Why haven't Igot living fire which could weave musically these beauties. I can't do it
    with pigment. I want poetry (8 music & light, not coloured chalks.”
                                                    —Harris to Crowley, date uncertain.


When we ask what makes the Thoth Tarot unique, the first and most obvious
answer is the artwork. If we appreciate nothing more about these marvelous cards,
it is enough for us to invoke the cliché: “I may not know much about art, but I know
what I like.” Sales figures, year after year, prove that a great many people know that
they like these cards.
    The cards of the Thoth Tarot display more than just Lady Harris’s skillful exe-
cution of traditional tarot images, fine-tuned to reflect a more modern under-
standing of self and the natural universe. Any competent cartoonist following
Crowley’s instructions could have done that. Harris exceeded Crowley’s wildest
expectations by actually incorporating within the very fabric of her style the pro-
foundly subtle essence of his spiritual doctrine. It was a supreme wedding of artis-
tic technique and deepest mysticism.
    Harris’s style is characterized by her graphical conversion of the mathematical
concepts of projective geometry.* A provocative expansion of Euclidean geometry,
projective geometry was, in the mid 1930s, the focus of intense study among the
disciples of Rudolf Steiner.”Three years before she began painting the Thoth Tarot,
Harris studied under two of Steiner's most brilliant students, George Adams and
Olive Whicher, and was soon busy transferring theoretical mathematics to canvas.
    Projective geometry presumes more than a polarity between a central point
and an infinitely distant surface (center and periphery). Because of the fragility (if
not the downright nonexistence) of time-space, it allows that a central point and infi-
20                                           Understanding Aletster Crowley's Thoth Tarot


nite space can occupy the same position. However difÏcult (or unimportant) it may
be for us to grasp the mathematical subtleties of projective geometry, we see it
thrillingly manifested in Harris's use of lines, nets, arcs, swirls, twists, and angles
stretched and overlaid one upon another, or otherwise combined to visually rede-
fine the fabric of space. Each time we gaze upon one of these cards, we are obliged
to transcend the dimensional boundaries of our minds and momentarily place our-
selves in an environment where infinite depth can exist simultaneously with infi-
nite projection.
     Had Crowley paid Harris anything for her labor, we would have to say that he
certainly got his money's worth. Not only did her stylization make the cards haunt-
ingly beautiful, but by incorporating the tools of projected geometry she also paid
profoundest homage to the “deities” of his new Aeon cosmology.
     “Deities?” “New Aeon cosmology?” You might be thinking that all of this is
starting to sound like some new California-crackpot religion. Indeed, it is upon the
shoals of terms such as these that many who set sail on the sea of Crowley find
themselves shipwrecked and drowned. You can take comfort, however, in the knowl-
edge that Crowley’s New Aeon deities are not theological personages, as traditional
religions would have us imagine. They are simply convenient terms for natural
forces and principles that, because of evolutionary advances in human conscious-
ness, we are able to comprehend more clearly than our spiritual ancestors.
     These changes in spiritual consciousness are interpreted into stunning images
in the Thoth Tarot and are precisely what differentiate it from the tarot decks of
the past. It is, therefore, very important that we knowa litde bit about New Aeon
and the book that Crowley believed to be the fundamental revelation of the age,
The Book ofthe Law.
                            CHAPTER                      FIVE

                                             GD
                 THE PROPHET AND THE
                        BOOK OF THE LAW


    Oh! thou art overcome: we are upon thee; our delight is all over thee: hail! hail!:
    prophet ofNu! prophet ofHad!prophet ofRa~Hoor-Khu! Now rejoice! now come in
    our splendour &F rapture! Come in ourpassionate peace, (9 write sweet wordsfor the
    Kings


I realize that, for many people, all this talk about New Acons and shifts of con-
sciousness may seem to have nothing to do with tarot cards. I assure you it has
everything to do with the Thoth Tarot. If this book is to live up to the promise of
its title, it will be important for you to grasp the key elements that make the Thoth
Tarot the Thoth Tarot. Foremost among these are the revolutionary doctrines
revealed in a tiny book and the strange assertion that Crowley was a prophet.
    I confess that, when I first started to explore the cards, I was very uneasy when
I learned that Crowley considered himself some kind of prophet and that the cards
might be an illustrated textbook to his weird, and perhaps dangerous, new spiri-
tual movement. I had read some very nasty things about Aleister Crowley and I
certainly did not want to waste my time or jeopardize my soul by dabbling with
“the dark side.”
    I soon realized that, if there was any darkness involved, it was the darkness of
my own fears, not in The Book ofthe Law or the seventy-eight pieces of printed card
stock of the Thoth Tarot. As is often the case when dealing with Mr. Crowley,
things aren’t always what they appear at first sight—then again, maybe they are.
He is like a quirky uncle who makes you pass a test of patience or courage before
rewarding you with candy. Only afterward do you discover your real prize was not
the candy, but the priceless reward of cultivating the virtues of patience and courage.
22                                            Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


     On the 8, 9, and 10 of April, 1904 in an apartment in Cairo, Aleister Crowley
received (channeled) Liber
                         AL vel Legis, The Book ofthe Law. It is a curious little
book consisting of three short chapters of prose poetry. The circumstances leading
up to the reception of The Book ofthe Law are extremely interesting and, unfortu-
nately, a subject I will not have much room to discuss in this work. I encourage
anyone who wishes to learn more about this fascinating chapter in Crowley's spir-
itual career to read The Equinox ofthe Gods“ and any of the excellent recently pub-
lished Crowley biographies.
     Briefly, Crowley and his wife, Rose, were honeymooning in Cairo when Rose
fell into a trance in which she claimed to give voice to the gods of ancient Egypt,
particularly the god Horus. At first, Crowley dismissed these “messages” as non-
sense. After hours of thorough interrogation, however, he became convinced that
Rose could not possibly possess enough technical information to be faking it.
    He took her to Cairo’s Boulak museum (whose collections are now part of
the Cairo museum) so she could point out precisely which god was responsible
for the messages. Ignoring the more popular images of Horus, Rose excitedly iden-
tified a simple wooden stéle from the twenty-third to twenty-fourth dynasties as
the source of the communications. It was the funeral stéle of Ankh-af-na-khonsu,
a notable political and religious figure of several royal administrations. This Stéle
of Revealing (see figure 1 on the inside front cover), as it would later be called,
triggered a series of psychic and magical events that culminated with Crowley’s
reception of The Book ofthe Law.
     “Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law.” “Love is the law, love under
will.” These are the two most recognizable watchwords from The Book ofthe Law.
The “Law” they refer to is the law of Thelema (Greek for “will”).
    In essence, the book’s message is simple. It announces the beginning of a New
Aeon in which the spiritual formulae of previous aeons will be amended to better
harmonize with humanity's expanded consciousness. The third verse of the first
chapter announces that “Every man and every woman is a star”; it describes quite
succinctly the fundamental shift in our self-identity that characterizes this new
period in human evolution. No longer must we view ourselves as cold, dark satel-
lites helplessly orbiting the “sun” of the family, tribe, race, religion, or nation on
whom we depend for light and the fixed trajectory of our lives.
     The individual is now to be recognized as the primary and preeminent unit of
society. It is now possible for humanity to awaken to the liberating fact that each of
us is a star, as unique and self-radiant as our celestial counterparts. Instead of des-
perately trying to determine the will of God and then clumsily attempting to coop-
erate with it, each of us must now come to realize that our will, if properly understood
and executed, is already in harmony with the divine will. In other words, in this age,
the holy quest is to discover one’s own way rather than trying to guess what a God
wants for you and hope from moment to moment that you are guessing correctly.
The Prophet
       and The Book of the Law                                                        23


    Perhaps the most important quality of The Book of the Law that sets it apart
from all other holy books is the fact that no one is allowed to interpret its meaning
to anyone else. No priest, no preacher, no politician, no professor, no philosopher
can presume to tell anyone what anything in The Book ofthe Law means. This effec-
tively prevents the formation of the dogma, doctrine, and intolerance that has been
the curse of the “great” religions of the past and that continues today to provoke
worldwide religious strife.
    The three “deities” of The Book ofthe Law are the main figures that appear on
the Stéle of Revealing; they express the abstract dynamics of the universe. They are
Nuit (sometimes spelled “Nu” or “Nuith”), the goddess of infinite space, the per-
sonification of an infinitely expanded universe; Hadit (sometimes spelled “Had”
or “Hadith”), the god at the heart of Nuit, the personification of an infinitely con-
tracted point; and their child, Ra~Hoor-Khuit (sometimes spelled “Ra-Hoor-
Khu-it,” “Ra-Hoor-Khu,” “Ra Hoor Khut,” “Ra-Hoor-Khut”), who, on the Stéle,
is the hawk-headed god enthroned behind an altar of offerings.
    These three deities are, in a very real way, the personifications of the key ele-
ments of projective geometry: Nuit the periphery, Hadit the center, and Ra-Hoor-
Khuit the transcendent “being” that is created when it is recognized that the periphery
and center simultaneously occupy the same position. As Nuit is infinite out-ness, and
Hadit is infinite in-ness, they are both equally everywhere and locked in infinite
embrace. This is lovemaking on a cosmic scale, and Ra-Hoor-Khuit is the prod-
uct of this union.
     The Book of the Law contains several very interesting references to individual tarot
cards, but we'll learn more about that in Part II of this book.
    Egyptian deities and projective geometry may seem like pretty weighty subjects
for a book about tarot cards. Some of you may even feel uncomfortable whenI use
the term “god” or “goddess.” Please know that whenI do, I am not referring to spir-
itual beings who may or may not be at odds with your religion or spiritual world-
view. They are simply convenient terms for natural—indeed mathematical—facts
of life that are so fundamental to the fabric of reality that it is appropriate to refer
to them as deities.
    But what about Aleister Crowley being a prophet? Are we talking about the same
Aleister Crowley who caused a sensation in artistic circles by chiseling off the bronze
plaque that had been attached (by prudish French authorities) like a fig leaf over the
genitals of the stone angel marking Oscar Wilde's grave? The same Aleister Crowley
who pranced into the Café Royal wearing the plaque as a codpiece and then pre-
sented it to the sculptor, Jacob Epstein? Are we talking about the same Aleister
Crowley who joked that he had killed and eaten two of his Himalayan native porters
while on a climbing expedition? Are we to believe that this outrageous libertine
who seduced scores of women and men could possibly be a prophet?
     The Book ofthe Law declared in no uncertain terms that the “Scribe” (Crowley,
24                                             Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


or the spiritual entity known to the world as Aleister Crowley) was the prophet chosen
by the spiritual forces of human evolution to deliver the good news of the New Aeon
to the world. For many of us, the word “prophet” carries with it a great deal of sectarian
baggage. Let me assure you that when I refer to Aleister Crowley as a prophet, I am
suggesting only that (like shamans of all times and cultures) he was a person who,
under certain conditions, was able to observe and then give voice to the great unseen
forces and events that shape the spiritual development of humanity.
     These forces and events are not the province of any particular religion or cul-
tural movement. Rather they are symbolic expressions of humanity's changing point
of view—a point of view that becomes more accurate as our understanding of the
universe around us improves; a point of view that changes, sometimes subtly, some-
times radically, step by step, as the inevitable result of our evolving consciousness.
     Crowley's revelation (if
                            we choose to call it that) is, in essence, not a revela-
tion at all, but a recognition of certain spiritual facts of life—universal facts that
each of us can recognize if we care to, and that each of us could communicate to others
if we were skilled enough in the use of language.
     I often hear it said by critics of Crowley, and those who, for one reason or
another, are afraid of him, that he could not possibly be a prophet because he was
so immoral and evil. As each of us have our own ideas concerning what is or is not
immoral and evil, it is useless for me to argue that point. Perhaps it is more pro-
ductive to debate whether being immoral and evil should necessarily prevent one from
being considered a prophet.
     It is clear to me from reading the Bible that prophets are very human and have
their good and their bad days. For example, look at what the Bible tells us hap-
pened when the prophet Elisha had a bad day:


     And he [Elisha] went up from thence to Beth-E]; and as he was going up
     along the way, there came forth little boys out of the city and mocked him,
     saying, “Go up, you bald head, go up, you bald head.” And he turned back
     and saw them and cursed them in the name of the Lord. And there came
     forth two she-bears out of the forest, and tore forty-two of the boys.


     It is true that Crowley could be as petty and cruel as anyone. He took pleasure
in doing many things that most of us would not wish to emulate. At no time during
his long and infamous life, however, did he commit any felonious crime serious
enough even to warrant arrest, let alone so diabolically evil as to use his powers to
slaughter forty-two innocent children just because they made fun of his haircut.
     While we may concede that all prophets are wild and outrageous characters, it
does not necessarily follow that all wild and outrageous characters are prophets.
What other qualifications did Crowley possess that might tempt providence to
choose him at the turn of the twentieth century to be prophet of the New Aeon?
The Prophet and The Book ofthe Law                                                  25


    In my opinion, the character, the personality, yes, even the brash ego of Aleister
Crowley combined to make him the perfect candidate for modern prophet-hood.

    He was a passionate and adventurous spiritual seeker, bound from early
    manhood by severe personal oaths to gain supreme enlightenment,
    He was a master poet, adept in the art of transforming abstract concepts into
    the imagery of language;
    He was (as much as any man of his day) intimately acquainted with the gods,
    religions, and mythologies of both the East and West. This familiarity gave
    him a rich vocabulary of words and images understandable to people of
    many cultures and religions.


    And most important:
    He was alive at the very moment a great shift of human consciousness was
    about to dramatically change the world;
    He was sensitive enough to perceive this change and had the language skills
    to communicate it;
    He was willing to suffer condemnation, ridicule, financial ruin, personal
    tragedy, and professional vilification to tell the world about it.


    You can argue all you want that Aleister Crowley was a flawed and perfectly nasty
individual,that he was despised and a dangerous person to know. Despite all his
shortcomings, however, it is clear to me that he possessed all the ingredients nec-
essary to make a prophet. A prophet does not need to be perfect. A prophet does
not need to be loved. A prophet does not need to be popular. A prophet does not
need to be harmless. A prophet need only have a vision of the truth and the courage
to give voice to that truth no matter what the consequences.
                             CHAPTER                     SIX

                                           CA)
                    THE AEON OF HORUS


    Abrogate are all rituals, all ordeals, all words and signs. Ra-Hoor-Khuit hath taken
    his seat in the East at the Equinox ofthe Gods.*


It is obvious to anyone who is more than casually interested that there are several
major features that distinguish the Thoth Tarot from other more traditional decks.
First, the four court cards of each suit are titled Knight, Queen, Prince, and Princess,
rather than King, Queen, Prince, Princess, (or King, Queen, Knight, Page, or vari-
ants found in other decks). Crowley gives us a very interesting explanation for this
that I will discuss in detail in chapter 11.
    He also makes very significant changes to four of the trumps. Cards that have,
in the past, borne the titles Justice, Strength, Temperance, and Judgment (or Last
Judgment) are, in the Thoth Tarot, respectively named Adjustment, Lust, Art, and
The Aeon. Crowley explains that the new titles more accurately convey the essen-
tial meanings of these cards. We will explore why in a moment.
    Name changes notwithstanding, the basic images Lady Harris painted for
Adjustment, Lust, and Art are more or less consistent with their counterparts in
traditional packs. The Aeon, the card that replaces Last Judgment, is a different
matter. Instead of displaying a trumpeting angel awaking the dead from their cofÏns
on Judgment day, The Aeon reveals the beautifully stylized figures of the deities
from the Stéle of Revealing and The Book ofthe Law: Nuit, the Goddess of infinite
space; Hadit, the God of the infinitely contracted point; and Ra-Hoor-Khuit
(Horus), the child of their union.” This change not only radically differentiates
The Aeon ofHorus                                                                      27


The Aeon card from the traditional Last Judgment card, it also serves to cast more

subtle changes in other cards of the Thoth Tarot.
    What is the reason for this dramatic departure from Judgment’s traditional
image? According to Crowley, the change was necessitated by the fact that the spir-
itual event depicted in the old versions of the Last Judgment card has already
occurred, and The Aeon card has replaced it to illustrate the defining moment when
the old aeon gave way to the new.
    For many tarot enthusiasts who understand that the tarot is an evolving spir-
itual organism, the changes manifested in the Thoth Tarot come as logical and wel-
come improvements. For others, the deck is an affront to their spiritual world-view.
The fact that the cards were created by the wicked Aleister Crowley only reinforces
their dark suspicions. This attitude, in my opinion, is very unfortunate; in the next
few pages, I will do my best assuage the concerns that, for many, may still linger.
    The traditional tarot trumps are filled with biblical and classical themes and a
cast of characters that seem to have been plucked directly from Mediaeval or
Renaissance street theatre. In the Lovers, we find Adam and Eve in the Garden of
Eden.The destruction of the tower of Babel is depicted in the Tower card; Fortune
displays the wheel of Ezekiel’s vision, and his four creatures grace both the
Hierophant* and the Universe cards. The Goddess Diana is the High Priestess,
and Prometheus the Magus. We find an Emperor, his Fool, a Pope (Hierophant),
a Hermit, a Hanged Man, Death, and the Devil himself.
    There are celestial trumps: the Sun, the Star, the Moon, and the Universe.
Looking at the trumps, even a novice astrologer can locate within the twenty-two
trumps the seven traditional planets and the twelve signs of the zodiac (see chap-
ter 7). We hold a universe in our hands when we pick up a deck of tarot cards.
Heaven and hell, church and state, stars and planets, elements and principals, even
ancient gods inhabit the seventy-eight pieces of card stock. Is it any wonder tarot
has remained a preeminent tool of divination for centuries?
    There is also a dominant theme that runs through the traditional images of
the trumps, a theme whose libretto was born in the last and most mysterious book
of the New Testament, The Revelation of Saint John the Divine. Here we are first
introduced to the trumpet-blowing angel of the Last Judgment card and the Empress,
who is obviously “a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and
upon her head a crown of twelve stars” (Rev. 12:1). The “woman upon a scarlet col-
ored beast” (Rev. 17:3) graces the Strength (Lust) card, and the angel who sets “his
right foot upon the sea, and his left foot on the earth” (Rev. 10:2) is the classic image
ofTemperance (Art).”                               |
    Currently, many bible students are reassessing their theories concerning the
Book of Revelation—exactly when it was written and what it was originally trying
to communicate. There is now a growing consensus among scholars that what John
was actually describing (in veiled imagery understandable to his contemporary audi-
28                                            Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


ence) was not the millennial end of the world, but the all too flesh-and-blood details
of the apocalyptic holocaust that ended the second Jewish revolt in A.D. 72.
     Be that as it may, it really doesn't matter whether or not John’s Revelation is the
prophetic vision of “end times” or an elaborately coded inter-ofÏce memo. The fact
remains that, for over a thousand years, its words and images have been seared into
the spiritual consciousness of Western civilization. We may never know the true
story behind the book, but the book has become a myth, and myth is truer than
history.
     No matter what John was originally trying to communicate, his Revelation
conveniently provides to both the sincere seeker and the religious extortionist a
grotesque vocabulary of terror and hope—the profound terror that comes from
contemplating one’s human inadequacies when standing before a divine throne of
eternal judgment on the day the world is destroyed by fire*—and the hope of a
future existence free of the fears and injustices of the past. The Revelation of Saint
John the Divine certainly has been successful in generating terror. Its singular short-
coming, however, is its failure to tell us that the “end of the world” is not really the
End of the World!
     What, then, does the traditional Last Judgment card represent? Ironically,
Crowley tells us that it does indeed represent the destruction of the world by fire,
an event that took place on March 20, 1904, in an apartment in Cairo, when Horus,
the God of force and fire, took his father’s throne at the Equinox of the Gods—an
event that signaled the end of the spiritual world of the dying god Osiris, and the
birth of the Aeon of Horus.
     Crowley taught that, within our racial memory, there have been three aeons. For
literary convenience, he labeled them after the three principal gods of Egypt: the
Goddess Isis; her husband/brother, Osiris; and their son, Horus.*! We have just
entered the Aeon of Horus, which supplanted the Aeon of Osiris, which supplanted
the Aeon of Isis.
     Aeons change, not as the result of some war in heaven or astrological event.
Rather they are simply the consequence of some improved modification in human
consciousness. Obviously, such a mutation needs to be universal and fundamental:
something most of us share with our fellows, something as simple as how we per-
ceive our relationship with the Sun.
     Yes. It’s as simple (and as profound) as that. And the Thoth Tarot, as much as
any piece of art or literature, reflects the dynamics of this new evolutionary step.
Let’s look briefly at the last two aeons to see how our relationship to the Sun has
developed and how it affected the spiritual lives of our ancestors. The following is
excerpted from my Angels, Demons, and Gods of the New Millennium.
The Aeon ofHorus                                                                    29


               THE AEON OF ISIS—The Formula of the Great Goddess
    It is impossible for us to pinpoint the dawn of the Aeon of Isis. . .. Evidence
    of the worship of the Great Goddess is found as far back as the age of Leo
    (10,996 B.c. to 8830 B.c.). In this period, when humanity was struggling
    with the first attempts at social intercourse, the most awesome mystery to
    excite the imagination was the power of woman. More than any other
    observable phenomena woman was most godlike. Each month, coinciding
    with the rhythmic cycles of the moon, she issued blood. Yet miraculously she
    did not die. When the cycle of bleeding stopped, her body changed; her
    breasts and belly swelled for nine moons until she burst with water and new
    life.
            Because the earliest Isian-agers were as yet unaware of the cause and
    effect relationship between sex and birth, it appeared that woman alone was
    the source of human life. Her life-giving powers were not limited to blood
    and birth, for from her breasts flowed milk, a rich white blood to nourish
    and sustain the new life she created. Woman was the human embodiment of
    the earth itself which appeared to spontaneously bring forth the vegetation
    and animals needed to sustain the race. It was the most self-evident fact of
    life . .   earth was mother . . . mother
                                         was life . .. god was woman.
                                                                  To be in
    harmony with the formula of the Great Goddess was profoundly simple, and
    as long as it was universally perceived that life and nourishment came
    directly from the earth and from woman, all successful endeavors, magical
    practices and religious expression did her homage.
            So deeply was this perceived reality impressed upon our ancestor's
    minds that long after they solved the mystery of where babies come from
    they clung tenaciously to the outward forms of Goddess worship and based
    all social and religious institutions on her formula. Eventually, however, as
    our understanding of the universe around us grew, we were confronted with
    a more complicated world-view and new unsettling mysteries.


            THE AEON OF OSIRIS—The Formula of the Dying God
    Even though the formula of the dying god became crystallized in the reli-
    gions and institutions of the astrological age of Pisces (166 B.c. to A.D.
    2000), the Aeon of Osiris dawned much earlier.
            The advent of agricultural societies necessitated a greater awareness of
    the cycles of the seasons. Osirian age farmers began to recognize the effects
    sunlight, or lack of it, had upon vegetation. They observed that at certain
    times of the year the days grew short and crops did not grow. It eventually
    became evident that, even though the earth brought forth life, the supreme
    creative energy that vivified that life came from the sun. Coincidental with
    this discovery was a universal acknowledgment of the vital role men played
30                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


     in the procreative process. Just as plant life needed the warm penetrating
     rays of sunlight to flourish, so too woman needed the introduction of the
     male sperm to avoid being forever barren. The heretofore-unrecognized
     concept of fatherhood became a dominant theme. The Aeon of Osiris truly
     began when our forebears raised their eyes to heaven and woke up to the fact
     that life on earth was a partnership of sun and earth, and the life of the race
     was a partnership of man and woman. However, the partnership was not
     perceived as being equal—the male backlash was severe and unmerciful.
     Deity was now male, a father, and his power was likened to that of the sun.
          Even though this shift of consciousness was the result of a more accu-
     rate assessment of the facts of life than was realized in the Aeon of Isis, it
     was not quite accurate enough. A defect in the perception of cosmological
     facts plunged our Osirian age ancestors into a dark and terrifying insecurity
     crisis that traumatized the human race so severely that we still suffer its
     effects. This fundamental flaw in understanding caused us to switch our
     focus from the mystery of where life comes from to an obsessive preoccupa-
     tion with death.
           The tragic misunderstanding focused on the belief that each day the sun
     was born at dawn in the east and died in the evening in the west. Specula-
     tions abounded about where the dead sun went during the darkness of night
     and if, indeed, a new one would ever appear again in the east. Perhaps it
     went to the land of the dead where we temporally visit during our nightly
     little death of sleep. The terrors and ecstasies of our dreams formed the
     archetypes of heaven and hell, and, after we die, who better to judge our
     worthiness for either place than the dead sun itself who created and sus-
     tained us during our stay on earth. This is precisely the part the god Osiris
     would play in Egyptian mythology and Christ's role in Christianity.
           To further complicate these fears the sun's yearly escapades caused even
     greater anxiety. Each year at the zenith of the sun's power in summer, it was
     observed that each day it rose and set a little south” of where it did the day
     before. Around harvest time the days grew noticeable shorter and the
     specter of the empty harvested fields accented the leafless trees and brown-
     ing grasses and painted a melancholy and frightening portrait of nature in
     articulo mortis. It was unsettling enough to have the sun completely disap-
     pear each day, but if it continued to head south until night was perpetual,
     how long could the world survive in cold darkness before a new sun
     appears?
          In an attempt to calm the shattered nerves caused by such musings a
     few wise souls took a deep breath and attempted to look at the big picture.
     Yes, the sun dies each evening in the west, but years of observation and the
     testimony of the oldest members of society indicated that no one could
The Aeon ofHorus                                                                      31


    remember a time when another one did not come up in the east within a rel-
    atively short period. Yes, the sun becomes weak and almost dies each year,
    but the same observations and testimony revealed that it eventually reverses
    its journey south and the days grow longer again until a new cycle of life
    returns to the earth. Based on the best information at their disposal they
    concluded that magical power, an unknown and supernatural force, was
    responsible for the sun’s resurrection. They further surmised that the secret
    of this magick must be hidden in the very nature of the sun itself, and if they
    could only harmonize with that nature then perhaps they too could over-
    come death.
         Everywhere they looked in nature, they saw the sun's cycle of birth, life,
    death and resurrection reenacted. They observed that plants sprouted to the
    surface in spring and grew tall and strong in the long days and warm sun-
    light of summer. Then in autumn, at the height of their maturity, they put
    forth seeds and then died or were cut down at harvest time. Like the earth
    itself, the seeds lay dead and buried throughout the lifeless winter, only to
    spring to life when the rains and the lengthening rays of the sun trans-
    formed the soil into a moist warm womb.
         They also observed accelerated plant growth near the decaying remains
    of animals or people and wherever large amounts of blood spilled upon the
    ground. This wonder was the male/solar counterpart of the female/lunar
    mystery of menstruation. The parallels between sun and phallus, sunlight
    and semen, the fertilizing power semen had upon woman and that blood
    had upon the earth did not escape our Osirian ancestor's fertile imagina-
    tions. A new “fact of life” (one that conformed to the secret nature of the
    sun) became the magical formula of the aeon; life comes from death.
         In order to harmonize with the new formula it would become necessary
    to take an active role in the great death/life drama. For the earliest members
    of the Aeon of Osiris human sacrifice was the supreme pantomime of the
    sun's daily and yearly sacrifice to the earth. It also illustrated the sacrifice of
    the potency of the phallus after ejaculation, and the seed’s sacrificial death,
    burial and resurrection. The spilling of human blood in the unsown or newly
    planted fields resulted in a noticeable increase in the fecundity of the har-
    vest. The most comforting benefit derived from such bloody forms of reli-
    gious expression was the undeniable fact that as long as they continued the
    sacrifices the sun always came up in the morning and always stopped its
    journey south and returned to bring spring and summer. This put a tremen-
    dous amount of power in the hands of the priests or priestesses who wielded
    the sacrificial knife. They positioned themselves between the people and the
    gods and implied personal responsibility for the rebirth of the sun. With
    each dawn they became demonstrably more powerful.
32                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


         At regular intervals all over the world the ceremonial slaughter of the
     Divine King assured a bountiful harvest and the well-being of the people.
     Even though the future victim was titular head of state, he was not a ruler in
     the modern sense. He was the living embodiment of the sun and therefore
     supreme monarch of the earth. His periodic murder and the coronation of
     his successor were occasions of great solemnity.
         In the waning years of the Aeon of Osiris the character of the sacrifice
     evolved from human blood to animal blood to bread and wine. Among the
     more mystically inclined sacrifice became a personal and transcendent expe-
     rience. Nevertheless, such changes did nothing to disturb the basic magical
     formula of the Aeon of Osiris. The cycle of birth, life, death, and resurrec-
     tion remained the dominant theme right up to the time of the magical
     revival of the late nineteenth century. By this time, however, the old formula
     was no longer based upon misinformation. It was built upon denial.


                             THE AEON OF HORUS—
                 The Formula of the Crowned and Conquering Child
     Long after our Isian Age ancestors solved the reproductive mysteries they
     continued to cling to a magical formula that originated at a time when it was
     believed that all life came spontaneously from woman and earth. So too, in
     the Aeon of Osiris, long after it was common knowledge that the earth
     revolves around the sun, the great religious and political institutions contin-
     ued to be obsessed with death and resurrection as if they still believed that
     the sun died every
                     day. ...
         [Today, the scientific “truths” of our] heliocentric solar system [have]
     become an unquestioned reality for all but the most isolated or mentally dis-
     enfranchised inhabitants of our planet. For hundreds of years mothers have
     assured their little ones at bedtime that the sun is not gone but only shining
     on the other side of the world. It is this simple reassuring truth that is the
     key to the formula of the Aeon of Horus. Not a formula of nourishment, not
     a formula of life, catastrophe, and resurrection; but a formula based upon the
     magick of continuous growth.
         In the Aeon of Isis we identified with the earth. Life came miraculously
     from earth and woman. All magical pantheons were aspects of the Goddess.
     Death was a mystery whose depths were impossible to plumb.
         In the Aeon of Osiris we identified with the dying/resurrected sun. All
     magical pantheons were aspects of God the Father. Death could be magi-
     cally overcome by obedience to formulae, rites and doctrine.
         In the Aeon of Horus we identify with the self-radiant, ever-living sun.
     All magical pantheons have become aspects of ourselves. We, like the sun,
     do not die. Death, like night, is an illusion. Life is now seen as a process of
The Aeon of Horus                                                                  33


    continual growth and humanity is developing a consciousness of the conti-
    nuity of existence that will eventually dissolve the sting of death.*


    It is important for us to remember that the traditional images of the tarot were
developed during the Aeon of Osiris, an age when it was universally accepted that
the Sun died each night and was reborn magically each morning. The old Last
Judgment trump was a perfect example of the death/resurrection theme of the dying
god.
 As we will see, in the Aeon trump of the Thoth Tarot, Crowley has now replaced
the images of the old formula (resurrected corpses rising from graves on Judgment
Day) with new images (the deities pictured on the Stéle of Revealing), images that
reflect the forces at work at the dawn of a new age—the forces that embody the
New Aeon formula of continuous life.
    This is the “good news” of The Book ofthe Law. This is the “good news” of the
Aeon of Horus. The Thoth Tarot is arguably the most brilliant and beautiful attempt
to convey in images and color this universal prophetic message. Each card in the deck
is set like a stained-glass window in a magnificent cathedral erected as a celebration
of evolving human consciousness. Every person who views them is touched in dif-
ferent ways. Some may wish to meditate on the story they tell. Some may feel
impelled to dissect each image minutely. Others may simply want to bathe in the
light and colors. No one, however,leaves this cathedral of the New Aeon untouched
by the experience.
                          CHAPTER                       SEVEN

                                             w
                                  THE VISION
                            AND THE VOICE


    This is the secret ofthe Holy Graal, that is the sacred vessel of our Lady, the Scarlet

     Woman, Babalon the Mother ofAbominations, the Bride ofChaos, that rideth upon
    our Lord the Beast.


Now we must briefly address an essential component of the Thoth Tarot that, for
many people, demands not only an open mind, but also a great deal of spiritual
courage. During his lifetime, this all-important aspect of Crowley’s work was under-
stood and appreciated by only a tiny number of his students. Unfortunately, it still
remains the source of much controversy and misinterpretation.
    It is of particular interest to us because several of the trump cards of the Thoth
Tarot are Lady Harris's dramatic renderings of a series of complex and curious
visions—visions that communicate, in symbols and words, the shifts of character
among the titanic forces that bring an end to one spiritual age and the beginning
of another. Some of these visions are intoxicatingly beautiful; some are dark and
terrifying; some seem to wallow in blasphemies. All of them, like visions recorded
by prophets of old, need a key to unlock their meaning.
   When he was a child, Crowley's exasperated mother called him the “Beast 666”
whenever she thought he was being naughty. Later in life, he would discover rich
Qabalistic significance to this term (and this number) and go on to identify his life
and work with his understanding of its esoteric meaning. This is very disturbing
to many people.
    It is understandable that anyone with a Christian background would recoil in
horror when he or she first encounters Crowley's shocking use of words and imagery,
such as the Beast 666, Scarlet Woman, All-Father Chaos, Whore of Babylon, or
blood of the saints. While these dark “blasphemies’ effectively serve to screen out
faint-hearted dabblers (and all who choose to remain self-blinded by superstition),
they offer a radiant and altogether wholesome spiritual treasure for anyone bold
and tenacious enough to doa little research (and a little meditation).
    As we discussed in the preceding chapter, Crowley taught that we stand at the
threshold of a new aeon—a period of profound intellectual and spiritual growth
and self-realization. In order to illustrate the evolutionary forces at work at this
pivotal moment, he employed a venerable (but easy to misinterpret) literary device.
He proceeded to hijack many recognizable terms, images, visions, and characters of
Egyptian, Hindu, Greek, Hebrew, and Christian mythology. He transmuted their
character and significance in order to communicate a new message—a message for
the ears of modern men and women whose rapidly expanding consciousness has
now equipped them to perceive objective and spiritual realities that would be incom-
prehensible to the seekers of only a few generations ago.
     In other words, Crowley took old terrifying concepts such as the Whore of
Babylon and the Beast 666 and, in his own way, redeemed them to represent glo-
rious things—as sacred and holy as the concepts of the Madonna and child were in
the Aeon of Osiris. He did this, not as a cold-blooded exercise of intellectual gym-
nastics, but by personally experiencing a series of ceremonially induced visions that
communicated these truths to him in a language of scriptural imagery with which
he was intimately familiar (and that just happen to be recognizable to much of the
Western world).
     Foremost among these visions are those he experienced in November 1900
while mountain climbing in Mexico, and between November 23 and December
19, 1909, while walking across the North African Sahara. A record of these thirty
visions was first published as Liber 418: The Vision and The Voice, in the spring of 1911
as a supplement to The Equinox. They are the source and the key to the spiritual
doctrines of
           Thelema, including the almost universally misunderstood theogony of
the goddess Babalon and the All-Father Chaos.”
     Obviously, these visions were intensely personal and, on one level, dealt specif-
ically with Crowley's own initiatory career. On another level (one that should be
of particular interest to us), they were also revelations concerning the universal ini-
tiation that humanity and the world is undergoing at this pivotal moment in human
evolution.
     He categorized these initiatory events in the same progressive order as the ten
degrees of the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, which represent a spiritual
ascent up the Tree of Life. While all the degrees are important and represent levels
of human consciousness, the fifth degree and the eighth degree are major land-
marks along the spiritual path of return, and Crowley makes frequent references to
them in The Book ofThoth.
36                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


     In the fifth degree (Adeptus Minor or Lesser Adept), the aspirant achieves
union with the Holy Guardian Angel, a spiritual entity unique to each of us who,
once attained, serves as our divine companion, mentor, and guide.* I will talk more
about the Holy Guardian Angel in chapter 11.
     The eighth degree (Magister Templi or Master of the Temple) is most terri-
ble and

     represents the single-most profound moment of our incarnations. It is faced
     only when the initiate has achieveda level of consciousness so high that in
     order to proceed farther requires the abandonment of all the old machinery
     of self-identity and perception. It means quite literally the annihilation” of
     everything that the individual has heretofore believed to be the components
     of personality and self.©


In other words, you can’t take anything across the Abyss that isn’t the essence of
“you.”


     Now, before you throw up your hands and dismiss all of this as just the com-
plex and ridiculous delusions of a cult of nineteenth-century eccentrics, please
pause and keep in mind that terms such as “Holy Guardian Angel” and “Abyss”
are simply convenient terms for universal spiritual experiences that, in other times
and cultures, are known by other names. Once we grasp the basic concepts, we
discover the Angel and the Abyss in the Vedas, the Upanishads, the Chaldean
Oracles, the Emerald Tablet of Hermes, in Plato, in Socrates, even in the Old
and New Testaments. No matter how these initiations may present themselves,
no matter by what name we choose to label them, every human being (indeed
every unit of evolving consciousness) will eventually wed the Angel and face the
ordeal of the Abyss.
     Even so, it is understandable that you would ask why any of us should be con-
cerned with the bizarre visions of one man whose morals we may find repugnant,
whose vocabulary of images are an affront to most of the world’s great religions,
and whose sanity is still a subject of debate? I must confess it took many years before
I began to appreciate the archetypal essences of The Vision and The Voice and real-
ize how extremely fortunate I was to possess such a document. Once I shed a few
superstitions and fears and carefully examined Crowley's symbolic images and
words, I found it to be, not only an eloquent and colorful example of one person's
initiatory adventures, but also a valuable roadmap to my own spiritual journey.
     I wish space allowed me to discuss The Vision and The Voice in detail, but that
has been done admirably in The Viston and The Voice with Commentary and Other
Papers It provides an in-depth study of these wondrous visions and brings the
spiritual reality of many tarot images to life.
                                                                                  7
The Vision and The Voue


    hope this chapter has assuaged any anxiety you may have harbored concern-
                                                       to spew from Crowley's
ing the true spiritual nature of the “blasphemies” that seem
works, and that you are now prepared to learn more about the Thoth Tarot fearlessly,
without “freaking out” at the mention of such things as Babylon, or the Beast, or the
Blood of the Saints, or the Scarlet Woman, or Chaos, or the Mother ofAbominations.
                          CHAPTER                     EIGHT

                                            CA
                           SECRETS OF THE
                          ROSE CROSS BACK


    Is not this Symbol
                  to be found upon the breast of all true Brethren of the Rosie Cross?
    Hold fast to this Jewel and treasure it as thy Life itself,
                                                             for many and great are its


It may seem odd that I dedicate an entire chapter to the design that adorns the
back of each of the seventy-eight cards of the Thoth Tarot (see figure 2, inside front
cover). I beg your indulgence and assure you (with some confidence) that your
patience will be rewarded.
    For me, the beautiful Rose Cross that appears on the back of each card is the
image that first attracted me to the Thoth Tarot. It is Lady Harris's exquisite inter-
pretation of the Hermetic Rose Cross (see figure 3, inside back cover) and is arguably
the most recognizable feature of the deck. As a young tarot enthusiast, 1 became
intimately familiar with every detail of the design by helping a friend reproduce
the image as a stained-glass window.
     It was clear to me, even as a novice, that the large red, blue, yellow, and green
squares that form the extremities of the arms of the cross could represent the four
tarot suits of Wands, Cups, Swords, and Disks; and that each of the twenty-two
petals of the great rose represented the twenty-two trump cards. One afternoon,
after lodge convocation,” I was smugly sharing these observations with another
neophyte when I was soundly upbraided by an elderly senior member who fixed
his gray gaze on me and, in the most solemn tone, informed me, “You have seen
but the earliest rays!”
     I innocently laughed in his face, not out of disrespect, but because his delivery
was so dramatic and corny I was sure he was trying to be funny. He was not amused.
“Come with me!” he said. I knew I was in trouble. I felt terrible. I followed him
Secrets ofthe Rose Cross Back                                                       39


outside the temple, fully expecting to be hurled into the eternal “outer darkness.”
Instead, we walked about half a block down the street to where his car was parked.
I awkwardly started to apologize, but I don’t think he heard me. He opened the
trunk of his car and lifted a dark purple velvet bag from a leather briefcase. He
undid the gold braided tie and lifted out a golden Rose Cross about five inches tall.
It hung from a blue ribbon and was proportioned exactly like the Harris cross, but
was festooned with many more colorful details. He didn’t say a word. He just
held it up about a foot before my eyes and let it twirl slowly in the late afternoon
sunlight.
     It was indescribably beautiful. Every petal of the great rose was brightly enam-
eled and displayed an exquisitely formed Hebrew letter of contrasting color. Upon
each arm of the cross was a colored pentagram surrounded by the elemental sym-
bols for fire, water, air, earth, and spirit. The alchemical symbols for salt, mercury,
and sulfur were nestled in the triple lobes that decorated the end of each arm. A
hexagram surrounded by colorful planetary symbols was centered upon the white
square directly beneath the great rose.
     The object was obviously made by a skilled craftsman. The only gold visible on the
front gleamed from the raised outlines (probably
                                               gold wire) that trimmed
                                                                     the edges and
each of the twenty-two petals of the rose. Each petal was meticulously filled with a
rounded drop of colored enamel that gave the appearance of a precious stone.
     The back had no enameling at all, just gold polished to a mirrored finish upon
which words were engraved. My street-side psychopomp would not let me read
what was written there.“ After a moment or two of allowing me gawk in wonder,
he told me with obvious pleasure: “This is the Rosy Cross. It’s all here.” He then put
it back in the bag and shut the trunk.
     I would soon learn that this was the device worn as the personal lamen of ini-
tiates of the Golden Dawn who achieved the degree of Adeptus Minor (the same
degree in which they are required to paint their own deck of tarot cards). However,
the years would reveal to me that it is much more than a colorful decoration or a fra-
ternal order’s badge of distinction. Properly understood, it is at once the door, the
lock, and the key to the temple of the Western mysteries. It and the Tree of Life
(which we will discuss in the next chapter) quite literally are the Table of Contents
of the tarot.


THE HOLY QABALAH
As I said earlier, we hold the universe in our hands every time we pick up a deck of
tarot cards. The mystery of how the universe was created, how it is sustained, and
where you and | fit into it has been the spiritual quest of fools and holy men and
women since the dawn of human consciousness. For centuries, students and sages
of Hebrew mysticism have developed a unique spiritual science called Qabalah.*
40                                             Understanding Aleister Crowley’ Thoth Tarot


     Qabalah is not a religion, philosophy, or doctrine. It is a way of thinking, a way
of looking at the world, a convenient method by which we dissect, examine, and
organize the universe and ourselves. It is a means by which we connect everything
in the universe with everything else in the universe. Numbers are the basic work-
ing tools of this marvelous discipline, and some of the most important numbers in
Qabalistic cosmology are precisely the same numbers upon which the tarot is con-
structed.
     “Oh!”I hear you scream. “Not math again! You said there'd be no more math!”
Don't worry. Even though Crowley wrote that the tarot “was designed as a practi-
cal instrument for Qabalistic calculations and for divination,”* even though he
filled forty-eight pages of Part I of The Book of Thoth in an attempt to convince us
how important the Qabalah is in understanding the tarot, I won't force us to dive
too deeply into Qabalistic waters. We will, however, have to get our feet wet, because
we won't even begin to understand Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot if we don’t at
least know some very fundamental things about the tarot as it relates to the Qabalah.
So put on your yarmulke and make yourselfa cup of coffee. It's a wonderful story,
and the Rose Cross will help tell it.
     Let’s start at the very center of all—and I really mean the center ofall.


THE POINT


                                           O
                                 Ficure 4.THE PoinT.


In the Harris painting, it is almost impossible to see the minute white point at the
heart of the tiny rose at the very center of the design. (If it’s not there, it should
be!) The white point symbolizes the shining point of pure existence, without size,
and (as yet) without position. It is not really a point at all, but a state of infinite
potentiality. It is the germ of creation before creation begins. As we will soon see,
this point is the inscrutable nail that crucifies the tiny rose to the tiny cross. It also
afÏxes the small rose cross to the large rose cross.
     Just where the point came from is a supreme mystery, and Qabalists have soared
to dizzying altitudes of speculation and argument in their attempts to understand
and explain it. One very popular theory involves three inscrutable qualities of noth-
ingness that, in the dawn of pre-creation, somehow ended up focusing (or con-
tracting) to a point.They called these three veils Ain, Ain Soph, and Ain Soph Aur.

     Ain—f#—Nothing that is so nothing that it negates the concept of
     nothing-as-an-absence-of-something. (In other words, we can't even say,
Secrets ofthe Rose Cross Back                                                         41


     “It is nothing,” because there is no “it” and there is no “is” in this kind of
     nothing.)


     Ain Soph—j®—Limitless Nothing. (Nothing defined). There is now an
     “It” in the statement “It is nothing.”


     Ain Soph Aur— §}© '*—Limitless Light (Positive emptiness). There is
     now an “It” and an “is” in the statement “It is nothing.”


     I won't drag us deeper into these misty musings. I only bring it up because, as
we will soon see, there is one tarot card, the Fool, that characterizes this (these)
wonderful (non-) state(s) of nothingness. But we’ll meet the Fool soon enough.
Let's get back to the “point.”
     Obviously, it is impossible to grasp the true nature of this preexistent point,
but it is the essence and identity of absolute deity. It is also the essence and iden-
tity of your own secret self—the real you that exists at the very center of all the
things you mistakenly think are you. If you truly understand the nature of the point,
you understand the nature of yourself and deity.
    A graphic artist or photographer would tell us that the massive and complex
Hermetic Rose Cross develops outwardly from this central point. A film director
trying to illustrate this concept might want to start with a close-up of the point,
then slowly move back to show how the various components of the Cross develop.
We won't do that.
     To really see and understand the essence of this great design, we must go inside
the point. We must zoom the camera of our imaginations in, past the circumference
past the white nothingness, into the very heart of the germ of creation.


THE CUBIC STONE


                                Ficure 5. THE CUBIC STONE.


When the haze of nothingness disappears, we are presented with the image of a
cube of what appears to be plain white stone. The ancients symbolized the point as
a white cubical stone that contains within itself the potential of all creation. When
we take a moment to consider how a cube is constructed, we come face to face with
the first great secret of the Qabalah, and the answer to the question: Why does the
tarot have twenty-two trump cards?
42                                             Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


     First, in order to be a cube, a point needs to extend into three dimensions; up-
down, right-left, and front-back.


                                          al

                        Ficure 6. CONSTRUCTION OF THE CUBE.


     These three dimensions create seven positions (the center and six sides) that
create twelve oblique points or edges to the cube (3 + 7 + 12 = 22). Qabalistic tra-
dition” tells us this is how deity formed the twenty-two letters of the sacred Hebrew
alphabet by which all things in creation are verbally ordered into existence. The
Hebrew alphabet is divided into three mother letters (attributed to the three prim-
itive elements), seven double letters (attributed to the seven planets of the ancients),
and twelve simple letters (attributed to the twelve signs of the zodiac).


          Tasve 1. Division oF THE Hesrew ALPHABET WITH ELEMENTAL,
                    PLANETARY, AND ZODIACAL CorrESPONDENCES


           3 Mother letters         7 Double Letters         12 Simple letters
         x Aleph, Air           2 Beth, Mercury         1 Hé, Aries
         &b Mem, Water          1 Gimel, Moon           1 Vau, Taurus
         w Shin, Fire           1 Daleth, Venus         ' Zain, Gemini
                                2   Kaph, Jupiter       "   Cheth, Cancer
                                D   Pé, Mars            0   Teth, Leo
                                .   Resh, Sun           *   Yod, Virgo
                                N   Tau, Saturn         ?   Lamed, Libra
                                                        2   Nua, Scorpio
                                                        0   Samekh, Sagittarius
                                                        ¥ Ayin, Capricorn
                                                        3 Tzaddi, Aquarius
                                                        P Qoph, Pisces


     As long as the cube is sealed, creation is put “on hold,” and these twenty-two
magick power-letters—these dimensions and positions and concepts—remain sus-
pended in a state of brooding potentiality. They are like the invisible
                                                                 germ in the heart
of the acorn that throbs with the potential of an eternity of future oak trees. In
order for this sealed cube to initiate creation, it must sacrifice itself upon a cross by
bursting open like a kernel of cosmic popcorn.
Secrets ofthe Rose Cross Back                                                      43


                     Ficure 7. UNFOLDED CUBE—THE GOLDEN CROSS.


     Creation begins, and we move from potentiality to actuality when, like a living
stone, our white cube unfolds as a golden cross of six squares. Once opened,
                                                                        it reveals
its secret treasure, a rose offive petals.


                            Ficure 8. THE ROSE OF FIVE PETALS.


     From time immemorial, the number five has symbolized the microcosm, the
little world of humanity (five fingers, five senses, head and extremities, etc.), and
the number six has symbolized the macrocosm, the greater world of deity.“ In the
language of images, the rose of five crucified on the cross of six is a statement that
tells us that, as human beings, we are inextricably connected to the larger world—
the larger reality of deity. As above, so below; the microcosm perfectly reflects the
macrocosm; Adam was made in the image of God, and so forth.
     You might ask, if we are such perfect images of such perfection, why do things
seem so imperfect? Why is there death and suffering? Why are there wars? Why are
there fleas and black widow spiders? Why is there bad cholesterol? The answer is
simple, but most of us are not yet equipped to accept it.
44                                             Understanding Alesster Crowley's Thoth Tarot


     We are already—tright here, right now—the perfect reflection of a perfect deity.
The problem is that we do not have a clue who or what we really are. What we rec-
ognize as ourselves—the entity that laughs and weeps, that stubs its toes, falls in
love, wins and loses, lives and dies—is not a true reflection of ourselves. We are some-
thing altogether different and more wonderful than anything we can imagine.
     Discovering that the rose of our human fiveness is wedded to the cross of deity’s
sixness is the first goal of every spiritual seeker. The next (and last) goal is for us to
identify completely with our secret self and come to the full realization that we are
neither truly five nor six, but a great big beautiful eleven. This endeavor, for lack of
a better name, is called the great work.


THE ROSE CROSS OF BEING
This small rose cross is the supreme glyph of the mystery of being and the common
denominator between the world of the rose and the world of the cross—between
you and me and our huge and all-encompassing counterpart. It is a single shining
point of pure existence that radiates from the center of both the rose and the cross.
    An unstoppable chain of events is set in motion when the cubical stone of
primal existence pops open to create (what I will call) the Rose Cross of Being.
Being now needs elbow room to manifest. Position, dimension, time, and space
must be the next additions to the creation cycle. Four green barbs radiate in four direc-
tions from behind the rose as if to say to being “Now that you are—here’s someplace
to put yourself.”


THE TWENTY-TWO TRUMPS


                         Figure 9. THE Rose Cross or Bene.


The small Rose Cross of Being now gives birth to a larger (graphically speaking)
rose. As it does, the heretofore potential qualities of three, seven, and twelve burst
Secrets ofthe Rose Cross Back                                                      45


forth into actuality, and the twenty-two tarot trumps blossom into existence in
three stages as the twenty-two petals of a great Rose of Manifestation.
     First to bloom in the primary colors of yellow, blue, and red are the Fool, the
Hanged Man, and the Aeon. These three personify the powers and qualities of the
three mother letters of the Hebrew alphabet and the primitive elements of air, water,
and fire.”


                                        FOOL

                                        A


                           HANGED
                                      VPA AEON
                                MAN


                 Ficure 10. THREE PETALS OF THE ELEMENTAL TRUMPS.


     Next to flower in the primary and secondary colors of the rainbow (scarlet,
orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, and violet) are the Tower,the Sun, the Magus,
the Empress, the High Priestess, the Universe, and Fortune. These seven trumps per-
sonify the powers and qualities of the seven double letters of the Hebrew alphabet
and the seven planets of the ancients: Mars, Sol, Mercury, Venus, Luna, Saturn,
and Jupiter.


                                      C2)
                  Ficure 11. SEVEN PETALS OF THE PLANETARY TRUMPS.


     Last to burst forth in a riot of primary, secondary, and intermediate colors
(scarlet, orange-red, orange, amber, yellowish-green, emerald green, greenish-yellow,
green-blue, blue, indigo, violet, and crimson ultraviolet) are the Emperor, the
46                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


Hierophant, the Lovers, the Chariot, Lust, the Hermit, Adjustment, Death, Art,
the Devil, the Star, and the Moon. These trumps personify the powers and quali-
ties of the twelve simple letters of the Hebrew alphabet and the twelve signs of the
zodiac: Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius,
Capricorn, Aquarius, and Pisces.


                Ficure 12. TWELVE PETALS OF THE ZODIACAL TRUMPS.


THE ROSE CROSS OF MANIFESTATION
Impelled by the creative dynamics that first formed the small Rose Cross of Being,
the great rose crucifies itself on a large unfolded cube. For convenience sake, I will
refer to this greater figure as the Rose Cross of Manifestation because it reveals the
mysteries of the manifest universe—of principals, energies, forces (represented by
the great rose of twenty-two petals and the tarot trumps) crucified upon the cross


                     Ficure 13. Rose Cross or MANIFESTATION.
Secrets ofthe Rose Cross Back                                                        47


of time and space and matter.These mysteries, we will soon see, abide in aces, court
cards, and the small cards of the four suits.


YHVH AND THE FOUR SUITS
The Hebrew mystics determined that it was much easier to meditate upon (and deal with)
the qualities
         of the supreme being if they hypothetically
                                            divided it (and consequently every-
thing else in the universe, including you and me) into four parts. To dothis,
                                                                          they cre-
ated the concept of a single God who exercised its omnipotence in a four-fold manner.
They even gave this one God a four-letter name, 77 1/7 * (the Hebrew letters Yod Hé
Vau Heé, the English letters YHVH, commonly pronounced Jehovah).
     Ina   very real sense, YHVH is the “God” of creation. Creation is, after all, what
we on earth, with our limited powers of perception, acknowledge as the reality of
the world around us. Most of you reading this book, however, have a pretty good
idea that there is more to the ultimate reality than things we can perceive with our
senses. That also means that there is a much greater reality beyond, behind, and
underlying the powers and forces that make up the God of creation.
     The Greeks gave a title to this creator-God who thinks it is God but is too
self-centered to realize that it too was created by something greater. They called it
Demiourgos, or the demiurge. Zeus was a demiurge. Another name for Zeus is
Jove, whose name, spelled in Hebrew, is uncomfortably close to Jehovah 7 177 °.
Because the demiurge is not sure of its origin, it's understandable that it would be
a bit insecure. It might even refer to itself as a jealous god and forbid the worship
of any other competing deity. Hmm! But I digress.
     The formula of YHVH divides the macrocosm into four descending worlds:
Arziluth” (the archetypal world, the environment of the consciousness of supreme
deity), Briah (the creative world, the world of the great archangelic forces), Yetzirah
(the formative world, the world of the angelic forces that execute the specific duties
of their archangel masters), and Assiah (the material world).
     At the same time, the formula of YHVH divides the microcosm (and the
human soul) into four descending levels: Chiah (the life force), Neshamah (the
divine soul-intuition), Ruach (the intellect), and Nephesh (the animal soul).
     Finally, all of these four-part concepts can be expressed metaphorically as the
four elements of fire, water, air, and earth, which in the tarot are represented by the
four suits, Wands, Cups, Swords, and Disks.
     When we speak of the four elements, we are not referring to the chemical ele-
ments that are the building blocks of matter. We are simply saying that, for classi-
fication purposes, we divide everything in the universe into four very broad categories.
If anything is something enough to call it “something,” then it is fiery, watery, airy,
or earthy in nature, and falls into one of the four categories represented by YHVH
and the four tarot suits.
48                                             Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


Tase 2. THE Four Tarot Surrs Uttimatecy Represent THE Divine Name, Yop He
                  Vau HE, anp Its FourFo_p Division or CREATION


  Great Name                    9              Pa               1              Pa
  Element                    Fire            Water             Air            Earth

  Qabalistic World | AUN | cements | recta | Masses
  Part of Soul | fran |Nesta | Augen | Mepis
  Four Tarot Suits | Wands                | Cups |           Swords | Disks


SPIRIT


                                        SWORDS


                             WANDS                    CuPs


                                          DISKS


         Ficure 14. THE FouR SUITS ON THE Rose Cross of MANIFESTATION.


As we face the great cross, we see that the left arm is red to represent the fire suit
Wands, the right arm blue for the water suit of Cups, the top yellow for the air suit
of Swords, and the lowest extremity green for the earth suit of Disks. The square
directly below the great rose is white and represents the fifth element, spirit. No
single suit is attributed to spirit, for the influence of spirit pervades the entire deck—
indeed, pervades all creation.
    In the manifest universe, it is the job of the four elements to combine with
each other. Nothing is entirely fire or water or air or earth. Even on the material
Secrets ofthe Rose Cross Back                                                        49


plane, we see this is so. For example, hot magma froma volcano is fiery because of
its heat, watery because it flows, earthy by nature, and exudes gas and steam. A
lover's quarrel is fiery and explosive, watery because of the emotions, and airy because
it is swift and communicative.
     Something is needed to bind the four elements together in infinite propor-
tions and combinations in order to construct the universe. Something is also needed
to keep the elements from melding and turning the universe into one big glob of
mush. That something is spirit and, in the language of symbols, it is expressed by
the pentagram.


                                         Spirit


                                 Air              Water
                                 A                 V


                                 mm               =A
        Figure 15. THE PENTAGRAM-—SPIRIT RULERSHIP OF THE FOUR ELEMENTS.


THE ACES AND COURT CARDS
In tarot, the ace of each suit represents spirit in its purist form. Dwelling inside
each ace are the four court cards of the suit. It’s as though we look at an ace under
a microscope and see that it is composed of a fiery component (the Knight), a watery
component (the Queen), an airy component (the Prince), and an earthy compo-
nent (the Princess).


                                          ACE


             Ficure 16. THE PENTAGRAM—THE ACE AND THE COURT CARDS.
50                                                                     Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


                                           (ACE)
                                               (rane) (BO
                                                 aspact || aspect
                                                    of suit              of suit


                                               \.              y,

                                               (PRINCESS) (~KNIGHT )

                                                     ae                   :


             Ficure 17. THE COURT CARDS ARE ELEMENTAL ASPECTS OF THE ACE.


           Tase 3. ELEMENTAL SUBDIVISIONS OF THE Aces AND Court Carps


                           ACE                 KNIGBT                   QUEEN                    PRINCE                 PRINCESS
                    (Sparit aspect of suit) | (Fiery aspect of nait) "Watery aspect of suit)| (Airy aspect of suit) \(Earthy aspect of suit)


  WANDS Spirit
          of Fire | Fire
                      of Fire | Water
                                  of Fire | AirofFire | Earth
                                                          of Fire

  (Suit of Water)   Spirit of Water | Fire of Water                 | Water of Water | Air of Water               | Earth of Water


 SWORDS Spirit of Air                         Fire of Air              Water of Air             Air of Air             Earth of Air
  DISKS Spirit
          of Earth | Fire
                       of Earth | Water
                                    of Earth | of
                                              Air Earth | Earth
                                                            of Earth


       Four pentagrams, representing the ace and four court cards of each suit, are
placed upon the extremities the Rose Cross of Manifestation.
       It is the cosmic duty of the elements to combine and mix with each other in order
to facilitate creation. We will see this demonstrated in greater detail later in our
discussion of the aces, court cards, and small cards. On the diagram of the Hermetic
Rose Cross, this elemental churning process is suggested by the colors of the four
pentagrams on the arms of the cross:


     * The pentagram representing the ace and court cards of fire (on the left arm)
       is colored green, (the combination of air-yellow and water-blue);
     * The pentagram representing the ace and court cards of water (on the right
       arm) is colored orange, (the combination of air-yellow and fire-red);
Secrets ofthe Rose Cross Back                                                      51


  * The pentagram representing the ace and court cards of air (on the top arm)
     is colored purple, (the combination of fire-red and water-blue).


                                    Ace, Knight, Queen,
                                 Prince & Princess
                                              of Swords


                                                °


                                        $e
                                    Ace, Knight, Queen,
                                 Prince & Princessof Disks


                   Ficure 18. Four ACEs AND SIxTeEN Court Carns.


But what about the pentagram of earth, on the lowermost extremity of the cross?
     You will notice, as we continue to study the tarot, that in almost every case,
the element of earth is treated differently than the other elements. It is as though
earth is the stepchild of the elemental family (no offense to stepchildren). Think
about it. We didn't see earth manifest along with fire, water, and air when the Great
Rose started to blossom, did we? We will soon discover the Princess (the earthy
aspect of her court-card family) doesn’t get to rule thirty degrees of the zodiacal
year like her father, the Knight; her mother, the Queen; and her brother, the Prince.
What gives? Is earth really an element?
     The answer is one of the most wonderful mysteries of the tarot, indeed, one
of the most important secrets of
                              Western Hermeticsm. Crowley tells us it is “the gen-
eral doctrine that the climax of the Descent into Matter is the signal for the red-
integration by Spirit.””
     I know that sounds like the kind of snooty Crowleyism that this book is meant
to avoid. For years, the above phrase from the Book of
                                                    Thoth didn't make any sense
to me at all. I thought the word “redintegration”
                                              was a typographical error and that
Crowley meant to write “reintegration.” “Redintigration” is indeed a word—a very
archaic word meaning restoration to a former state. The importance of this word,
and the “doctrine” Crowley mentions above will become clearer in chapter 11 (which
concerns the Holy Guardian Angel) and when we begin to discuss the individual
52                                             Understanding Aletster Crowley's Thoth Tarot


cards. For now, let’s be satisfied to know that element earth is the lowest of the low
in the universe. Therefore, it is especially sacred to and especially linked with the high-
est high.
       On the Hermetic Rose Cross, the earth pentagram is pure white, but the entire
lower extremity of the cross, upon which it sits, is divided into four sections col-
ored black, citrine (a mixture of blue, red, and yellow but with a predominance of
yellow), olive (a mixture of the same colors but with a predominance of blue), and
russet (the same but with a predominance of red).
       It is as though what began as the pure white light of the minute point at the
center of the tiny rose has passed through a prism and separated into all the colors
of the spectrum in the Great Rose. Then all the colors have mixed and remixed to
form all aspects of creation until, by virtue of their own vibratory weight, they settle
to the very bottom of the cross as dark and polluted colors. The pentagram that
seals them is pure white, as if to say “This mess may be the lowest of the low, but
it has something that no other section of creation has except the highest high—
that is, a little bit of absolutely everything!”


THE MACROCOSMIC HEXAGRAM
The white square directly under the great rose contains a hexagram displaying the
Sun surrounded by the other six planets of the ancients. Placing this symbol of the
macrocosm in the midst of the four pentagrams of the microcosm echoes on a
higher octave the symbolic message of the marriage of the human and the divine
that was first told by the small rose and cross. Those of you who are familiar with
the Lesser Ritual of the Pentagram will recall the words, “For about me flames the
Pentagram. And in the column stands the six-rayed Star.””


     Ficure 1g. ELEMENTAL PENTAGRAMS OF THE MICROCOSM; PLANETARY HEXAGRAM OF
THE MACROCOSM; UNION OF § AND 6, THE SYMBOL OF THE GREAT WORK ACCOMPLISHED.
Secrets ofthe Rose Cross Back                                                           53


                  FiGure 20. THE COMPLETED Hermetic Rose Cross.


THE ALCHEMICAL SYMBOLS
Our examination of the Hermetic Rose Cross would be incomplete if we didn’t
examine the symbols of the three alchemical elements of sulfur, mercury, and salt,
whose glyphs are found in the triple lobes at the end of each arm of the Great Cross.
Not to be confused with the natural elements of fire, water, air, earth, and spirit,
the three alchemical elements represent universal qualities or principals that inter-
act with and are profoundly dependent upon each other. Crowley tells us that


     Sulfur is Activity, Energy, Desire; Mercury is Fluidity, Intelligence, the
     power of Transmission; Salt is the vehicle of these two forms of energy, but
     itself possesses qualities which react on them.”


     Notice that symbols for these three alchemical principals occupy different lobes
on each arm of the Cross. Mercury is placed in the central lobe of the top and
bottom arm, indicating dominance in air/Swords and earth/Disks. The symbol of
salt dominates on the right arm (water/Cups), and the symbol of sulfur dominates
the left arm (fire/Wands).
    The secondary lobes of each arm are occupied with symbols of the not-so-
dominant alchemical principals arranged in a logical and balanced manner.This is
very important because, when these three principles are combined and balanced,
they create the alchemical substance known as “vitriol,” the universal solvent. Vitriol
will soon become very import to us as we study the inner mechanics of tarot. It is
the initials of the alchemical motto: Visita interiora terrae rectificando invenies occul-
tum lapidem (Visit the interior parts of the earth: by rectification thou shalt find
54                                            Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


the hidden stone). In his discussion of the trumps, Crowley goes so far as to iden-
tify three cards with the alchemical elements: the Magus is mercury, the Empress
is salt, and the Emperor is sulfur.
     Other trumps also have alchemical significance. The Art card is identified with
vitriol, and the Lovers, the Hermit, Death, and the Devil all have vital roles to play
in the alchemy of the tarot. There is also one more extremely important alchemi-
cal symbol we will see often when we examine the trumps. It is called the Orphic
egg. “This egg represents the essence of all life that comes under the formula of
male and female.””


THE THREE GUNAS
Crowley's reference to the rajas of Hindu philosophy necessitates, at this point, a brief
discussion of the gunas. The concept of the three alchemical elements is almost
identical to that of the three gunas of Hindu cosmology. The three gunas are rajas,
sattvas, and tamas (corresponding uncannily to sulfur, mercury, and salt). “All the qual-
ities that can be predicated of anything,” Crowley points out, “may be ascribed to
one or more of these Gunas: Tamas is darkness, inertia, sloth, ignorance, death and
the like; Rajas is energy, excitement, fire, brilliance, restlessness; Sattvas is calm,
intelligence, lucidity and balance.””*
     These three qualities are universally present and at work in all manifested
energy (including matter and you and me). They are in constant conflict and, at
any given moment, one of them gains temporary dominance. Cosmic balance, how-
ever, dictates that no one principal can remain on top for very long before another
usurps its position to enjoy its moment in the Sun.
     The mechanics of this eternal three-way conflict is the driving force that turns
the great wheel of the ever-changing universe. It is illustrated beautifully in the
Thoth Tarot as Atu X, Fortune, where rajas (sulfur) is represented as the figure of
the Sphinx, sattvas (mercury) by Hermanubis, and tamas (salt) by the figure of
Typhon. More about this when we discuss Fortune.


THE BARBED ROSE LEAVES
Radiating like glories from behind the Great Rose are twelve barbed rose leaves—
four large leaves each flanked by two small leaves. The four large leaves contain
the letters 1 N R I and the astrological symbols for Virgo, Scorpio, Sol, and Virgo
respectively. Three of the smaller leaves contain the letters L V X and three con-
tain the letters I A O. The remaining two smaller leaves contain an additional
letter I and a small Calvary Cross +. To be perfectly frank, I have never learned a
satisfactory explanation for the presence or positioning of these two seemingly
superfluous figures.
Secrets ofthe Rose Cross Back                                                         55


     The letters INRI are placed on the large leaves in the following order: I—upper
left, N—upper right; R—lower left; I—lower right. The letters [AO and an extra
] are placed on the smaller leaves to the right of the large leaves in the same order.
The letters L V X and a small Calvary Cross are placed on the smaller leaves to the
left of the large leaves in the same order. Because the Hermetic Rose Cross is the
personal lamen of Adeptus Minor initiates of the Golden Dawn, and because the
letters   IN RI, L V X, and] A O play a key formulaic role in the mysteries of that
degree, it is very appropriate that they appear on the device itself.
     I N RI    can mean many things, including the venerable alchemical axiom,
Igni natura renovatur integra (All of nature is restored by fire), and the powerful
spell that I often use to repel obnoxious telemarketers: I’m not really interested!
Christian tradition, however, informs us that, at Christ's crucifixion, Pontius Pilate
ordered that a sign be posted at the head of the cross declaring in Latin, Greek, and
Hebrew, “Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews.” The real sign must have been pretty
large to accommodate the three sets of messages, but future artists would be sat-
isfied to display only the four letters I N RI (the initials of the Latin words “Jesus
Nazarenus, Rex Iudaeorum’”) painted on a wooden board nailed at an angle above
the head of a tortured and bleeding Jesus. For at least 1,400 years, the placard dis-
playing the Latin letters I N R I has been an indispensable accessory to every well-
dressed crucifix.
     Not being satisfied with the ofÏcially sanctioned explanations of these letters
that appear on holy images and souvenirs, Christian mystics and others toyed with
the heretical idea that there just might be something else—some esoteric mean-
ings—to the images of popular religious symbolism. Risking the stake, these spir-
itual outlaws proceeded to analyze I N R I in such a way that it eventually said
something other than Jesus from Nazareth, King of the Jews. That something else
was the magical formula (and the signs of that formula) that expressed their high-
est understanding of the cosmic secrets of life, death, and resurrection. Briefly, here’s
what they did.
     They first took the Latin letters I N R I and translated them into the Hebrew
letters °"13° (reading from left to right: Yod, Nun, Resh, Yod). Then they medi-
tated upon the astrological meanings of these Hebrew letters and discovered that
they tell (in their own astrological way) the familiar Egyptian solar myth of Isis
(Yod/Virgo) who mourns because an evil relative Apophis (Nun/Scorpio) has killed
her husband, Osiris (Resh/Sol). Isis eventually raises Osiris from the dead, and the
whole cycle starts again every morning and every spring
     That is howI N RI becomes I A O (which just happens to be the name of
the supreme god of the Gnostics, who embodies the magical formula of life, death,
and rebirth). Properly understood, the formula of IN RI/1A O explains the mys-
tery of the annual revolution of the Earth around the Sun and its diurnal rotation
upon its own axis. That is the highest mystery our Osirian Age ancestors could
56                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


understand. It is also the secret mystery knowledge of all agricultural civilizations
of the Age of Osiris. Not bad for seven letters (three of which are Js).
     By tradition, Isis, Apophis, and Osiris, are pictured making certain gestures or
signs:


     In the sign of the Mourning of Isis, Isis holds her arms, suggestive of the
     letter L.


     In the sign of Apophis and Typhon, Apophis thrusts his arms above his
     head at a ninety-degree angle, suggestive of the letter V.


     In the sign of Osiris Slain, he holds his arms out to his sides as if he were
     crucified.


     In the sign of Osiris Risen, he crosses his arms over his chest, forming an X
     on his body.”


     Taken together, these are the signs of L V X, the Latin word for “light.”
     Here is how the key word I N R I    is analyzed in formal ceremony:


     INRI
     Yod. Nun. Resh. Yod.
     Virgo, Isis, Mighty Mother
     Scorpio, Apophis, Destroyer
     Sol, Osiris, Slain and Risen
     Isis, Apophis, Osiris
     IAO
     The sign Osiris Slain (give sign)
     The sign of the Mourning of Isis (give sign)
     The sign of Apophis and Typhon (give sign)
     The sign of Osiris Risen (give sign)
     (repeat last three signs)
     L VX, Lux. The Light ofthe Cross.


     Magical tradition informs us that, on the material plane and in normal waking
consciousness, symbols are symbols and living things are living things. On the mag-
ical plane and in visionary consciousness, symbols are living things and living things
are symbols. In other words, if I have a vision of a lion or a monkey, those images
are merely symbols of something far deeper and abstract in my psyche that I need
to confront. Conversely, symbols in visions are actually living things in that plane.
Let’s say I am faced, in a vision, by a terrible fire demon (a symbol of something   1
Secrets ofthe Rose Cross Back                                                      57


need to confront). I need only protect myself with a symbol—perhaps the banish-
ing pentagram of fire, a symbol to me of the mastery of spirit over the elements,
but a living thing to the demon who is forced by all the laws of its own existence to
submit and obey.
     I only bring up this tidbit of magical lore to impress upon you the immeasur-
able symbolic power stored in the Hermetic Rose Cross. Viewed on the magical
plane, the Cross is teeming with magnificent life and energy. The adepts of the
Golden Dawn who wear it as their personal lainen are possessed with a most pow-
erful magical tool indeed.
     Now, before we look at the cards themselves, let's learn just a little bit about
the Tree of Life.
                             CHAPTER                     NINE

                                             ZB
                            SECRETS OF THE
                                TREE OF LIFE


     The Tree ofLife—Thisfigure must be studied very carefully,for it is the basis ofthe
     whole system on which the Tarot is based. It is quite impossible to give a complete

     explanation of this figure, because (for one thing) it is quite universal. Therefore
                                                                                        it
     cannot mean the same to any one person as to any other.”


The Hermetic Rose Cross has certainly yielded many of her secrets concerning the
cosmic roots of the twenty-two trumps, the four aces (suits) and the sixteen court
cards. However, she does not do a very good job of telling us why there are nine
(ten, if you count the Ace) small cards in each suit. To understand the mysteries of
the small cards, we are first going to have to learn a little bit about another Qabalistic
figure, the Tree of Life (Etz~Ha-Chayim).
    The schematic diagram commonly known as the Tree of Life is arguably the
most recognizable image of the Qabalah. It was first published in 1652 in Athanasius
Kircher’s Oedipus A:gyptiacus, and quite neatly serves to condense a great deal of
Qabalistic wisdom into a very small space. It is particularly illustrative of the open-
ing paragraph of perhaps the most influential Qabalistic texts of all time, the Sepher
Yetzirah (The Book of Creation).


    Yah, the Lord of hosts, the living God, King of the Universe, Omnipotent,
    All-Kind and Merciful, Supreme and Extolled, who is Eternal, Sublime and
    Most-Holy, ordained (formed) and created the Universe in thirty-two mys-
    terious paths of wisdom by three Sepharim, namely: 1) S’for; 2) Sippur; and
    3) Sapher which are in Him one and the same. They consist of a decade out
    of nothing and of twenty-two fundamental letters. He divided the twenty-
 WAXY                                                    7
                             bef        9
LS
                                            Atu it

ary
    Z                                   2
                                                         mi girs
                                                             spo
                                                                 ,
   n
                                                                        }
   SS          S                     ¥                         “)      v
   vit             ‘                Ata                    &           ive
(Sep
                       es            "               Rin
                                                                 CRMESSS
  eg                          ee
SYAE% Js                                                             Opa
                                                           a          fant at
PENG               9                                     wel         Tere
  B                     Ny WS .                                        >
   Vv

   i
                                                                       Bt


                        CS
                                   2.
                                   Ba ut     ?       >
                                                                      ¢
SE
LENvoR.
        .                           a                                “Ee.
                   o>               xv           Ae DXcrot
         cs)            Nt RNESQB 2                            Y-)

               CN            ASG)                        /*
                   @           “ounv’            fi

                                    v
                                   Atu
                                   XXT


                            e-D
                            P.-      +
                            Rea Noy
               Ficure 21. Tue Tree or Lire.
60                                             Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


       two consonants into three divisions: 1) three mothers, fundamental letters or
       first elements; 2) seven double; and 3) twelve simple consonants.”

    In the previous chapter, we learned that the thirty-two mysterious paths of
wisdom are comprised of the twenty-two letters (trumps) and their division by
three, seven, and twelve. Now we will learn just a little bit about the “decade out of
nothing.”
    We ten-fingered bipeds have always had a healthy respect for the numbers ten
and four. As a matter of fact, it appears that our hands and fingers are the source of
much ancient Qabalistic meditation—wisdom that would later help construct the
tarot. I won't bore you too much on this subject, but I will pause to point out that:

     * The tenth letter of the Hebrew alphabet is Yod, the Hebrew word for
       “hand”;


     * Our opposable thumb (working in cooperation with our other four fingers)
       is one of the most important attributes that separates humans from other
       animals and is the fundamental key to making us creative beings and the
       masters of our environment,
     * As tradition informs us that we are made in the image of deity, it follows that
       the creative “hand of God” must be the work of a single deity (spirit/ace) that
       expresses itself in a fourfold manner (YHVH . . four Qabalistic worlds, four
       parts of the soul, four elements, four tarot suits, four court cards);
     * Four and ten are inextricably related and mutually definable by simple
       mathematics (10 = 1+ 2 + 3 + 4).

     The following is from Angels, Demons and Gods of the New Millennium and
gives a brief summary of the creation of the “decade out of nothing.” Please do not
worry if at first you find it difÏcult to follow the logic of how the Tree of Life is
constructed. Believe it or not, once you grasp the basic concept, it is much easier
to think about than it is to explain.

       The Tree of Life is a linear schematic of ten emanations and twenty-two paths
       upon which the universal mechanics of energy and consciousness are pro-
       jected. In one respect it is a very unsatisfactory diagram for it attempts to
        dimensionalize the transdimensional. It has been called the diagram of the
       anatomy of God, and if we are indeed created in the image of God then that
       means that it also reveals the spiritual anatomy of each of us. Students of
       Kundalini Yoga agree, and point out that the seven chakras or spiritual centers
       in the human body can be projected quite comfortably upon the Tree of Life.
            All ten sephiroth, or emanations, of the Tree are really only aspects or
       facets of the top (first) sephira, Kether, which represents the totality of exis-
Secrets of.the Tree of.Life                                                            61


     tence—the supreme monad. But even the concept of ONE is a blemish
     upon the sublime perfection of the pre-existent ZERO.” If ONE           is to exist
     and become conscious of its oneness it must reflect itself (like a yogi in med-
     itation who reaches to the core of being and exclaims “that’s what I am!”).
     The mere act of reflection creates TWO *, . (ONE is now conscious of itself
     and its reflection.) The knowledge that there is a difference between ONE
     and TWO instantly creates a third condition 3-4, . This “trinity” by itself is
     still an abstraction and exists only in potentiality. Nevertheless, a primal pattern
     has been established by the process of ONE becoming THREE. This arche-
     typal germ sets into motion a chain-reaction that animates the entire creation
     scenario—the process of consciousness/light/spirit descending into matter.
           The phenomenal universe manifests through a process of degeneration
     in the next seven sephiroth. The trinity unit FOUR-FIVE-SIX is created by


     the reflection of the ONE-TWO-THREE unit i and the same process

     that created THREE from ONE-TWO creates the third trinity unit of
                                  32

     SEVEN-EIGHT-NINE. ae TEN, the world of matter, is rock bottom
                                                                              ya


     and dangles from the Tree oeLife like an afterthought of creation: ,xe© 1
                                                                                M4
     This is the “decade out of nothing.” It is the fundamental pattern of creation.
Theoretically, every conceivable idea, quality, principal, aspect, and tendency finds
a home in one of the ten pigeon-hole sephiroth of the Tree of Life. But the Hebrew
mystics were not satisfied with just one Tree of Life. God is One. True. But the one
God has a four-letter name, 7 177° YHVH, by which it manifests.
     And so, the ancient Qabalists found it easier to meditate upon the qualities of
one by considering it in terms of four. Consequently, for practical purposes (and
especially for tarot), we find ourselves dealing with four Trees of Life representing
the four letters 7.13 * YHVH, the four Qabalistic worlds, the four parts of the soul,
the four elements, and the four tarot suits. The titles of the ten sephiroth are con-
sistent in all four Trees of Life (see page 62).


THE FOUR TREES OF LIFE, THE ACES,
AND SMALL CARDS

The ten sephiroth, or emanations, of each of the four Trees of Life are joined together
by twenty-two paths that are portrayed in tarot as the twenty-two trump cards and
the letters of the Hebrew alphabet. The forty sephiroth of the four trees are per-
fectly represented in tarot as the four aces and the thirty-six small cards.
                                       1
                                     Kether
                                 The Crown
                        (Sphere of the Primum Mobile)
                                 The Absolute.
                             The Supreme Monad.
              3                                                    2
          Binah                                                Chokmah
       Understanding                                           Wisdom
     (Sphere of Saturn)                                 (Sphere of the Zodiac)
   Supremefemale concept.                                Supreme male concept.
      Crowley's Babylon.                                  Crowley's All-Father.
     Might ofPan/Nuit.                                     Chaos/Beast/Hadit.

                                THE ABYSS
                                       &
                            The false sephira, Daath
              5                                                    4
          Geburah                                              Chesed
          Strength                                             Mercy
      (Sphere of Mars)                                    (Sphere ofJupiter)
  Motion, storm and stress.”                            Home ofthe Demiurge.
                                                   Materialization, the rule ofLaw.”
                                          6
                                     Tiphareth
                                       Beauty
                                   (Sphere of Sol)
                          Energy in complete balanced
                                   manifestation.”
              8                                                    7
             Hod                                                Netzach
          Splendor                                              Victory
    (Sphere of Mercury)                                     (Sphere of Venus)
Illusion, imbalance, weakness.*                      Illusion, imbalance, weakness.
        Effeminate male.                                    Masculinefemale.

                                          9
                                     Yesod
                                  Foundation
                               (Sphere of Luna)
                         Seat ofthe great crystallization
                                      ofenergy.”
                                          10
                                      Malkuth
                                      Kingdom
                                (Sphere of Earth)
                               The end ofall energy.”
                                  The material world.
Secrets ofthe Tree ofLife                                                              63


     The area (or non-area) between the supemal triad (sephiroth 1-2-3) and the rest
of the Tree is called the Abyss. It is an inscrutable looking glass that separates the
ideal (the abstract concepts of 1-2-3) from the actual (the manifest qualities of the
phenomenal universe). Consequently, we view the aces, twos, and threes of the four
suits a bit differently than we do the other small cards, because they are the supernal
triad of their respective Trees of Life. The cards of the supernal triad are one big happy
family, a single unit that embodies the essence of the suit. Why are they so happy?
     All four aces are happy because they represent the Kethers of their Trees of Life
and the root of their elements. All the twos and threes are happy because, along with
their aces, they reside comfortably above the Abyss. The twos (Dominion, Love,
Peace, and Change) are the first manifestation of their suits as ideas. They are outra-
geously
  happy just to exist as the expression of their respective aces. The threes (Virtue,
Abundance, Sorrow,” and Work) were created automatically at the moment one
reflected to become two. The threes exist from necessity to stabilize the twos and
form the womb in which all the other small cards can incubate. Pretty abstract, eh?
     Please note that, in the above paragraph, I stressed the word “represent.” That
is because the small cards are not the sephiroth themselves. Even though, for prac-
tical purposes, we work with small cards as worthy representatives of the sephiroth,
the sephiroth themselves are of a vastly superior order of spiritual reality than could
ever be defined by the character and behavior of four sets of ten cards. In fact, the
small cards are subelemental in nature—blind forces that are merely sympathetic
echoes of the sephiroth that have filtered down into the elemental universe.
Nevertheless, even though we are possessed with limited powers of perception, we
can learn a great deal about the nature ofthe sephiroth
                                                  by listening to these echoes—
by observing (in an indirect way) how they color and affect the blind forces of the
elements represented by the small cards.
     Because Atziluth is the native world of Wands, and Briah is the native world
of Cups, and Yetzirah is the native world of Swords, and Assiah is the native world
of Disks, one might think that all small-card Wands, Cups, Swords, and Disks
would be happy in their respective Tree of Life. It doesn’t work that way. Each of
the four Trees of Life, because of the uniqueness of the world they represent, has areas
of strengths and weaknesses that differ from those of the trees of other worlds. For
example, Yesod may be strong in Atziluth (Wands), but weak in Briah (Cups) and
Yetzirah (Swords), and so on.


RULES OF THUMB
(I suggest you bookmark this page and refer to it often as you study the character-
istics of the of the small cards.)
     Unless there are strong astrological mitigating factors (which we will soon dis-
cuss), the following is generally true:
64                                            Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


     Aces, twos, and threes (cards of the supernal triad) are very strong and
     together define their suits in principal;
     Fours (being the first manifestation of their suit below the Abyss) define
     their suits in actuality. As a matter of fact, because they have no idea what
     life is like above the Abyss, the fours (like the Demiurge) mistakenly believe
     themselves to be the aces of their suits. They are very strong and, like the
     Demiurge Zeus, establish their element's “rule of law’;
     Fives are active and strong, but unbalanced and troublesome. (Shall we say
     downright horrible?);
     Sixes are invariably strong and noble representatives of their suits (being the
     direct reflection and first balanced manifestation of their ace);
     All the sevens (being unbalanced and low on the Tree of Life) are very
     difÏcult and for the most part, perfectly awful;
     Eights have much in common with the sevens (unbalanced and low on the
     tree). However,eights have fallen so low that they are starting to run out of
     the original energy of the suit, and so their planetary and zodiacal attributes
     become very important factors. Some are good—some not so good;
     Nines generally are stable and supportive of the suit. The exception is the
     Nine of Swords;
     Tens generally are a disaster because, with the exception of the Ten of Disks,
     they are about to completely lose their suit identity and plunge into a lower
     world. The Ten of Disks is the exception. Being the last small card, it has
     nowhere to go but back up to the top. That trick, we will ultimately learn, is
     the secret that sustains the universe.


     We can think of the ten sephiroth of the Tree of Life as representing a descent
of energy. In that case, we are actually contemplating the creation of the phenom-
enal universe. We can think of the sephiroth as representing a descent of con-
sciousness. In that case, we are actually contemplating the true meaning of the
concept of the fabled “fall of man.” We can also think of the sephiroth as the descent
of light—and when light descends we have color.
                         CHAPTER TEN

                                      Cy)
                    WORLDS OF COLOR


                         "... God
                               is light...”   (First Jobn: 1:5)


Now that we knowa little bit about the Qabalah, the Hermetic Rose Cross, and
the Tree of Life, we can discuss one of the most important aspects of the visual
magick that is the Thoth Tarot. One of the most striking features of the deck is
Lady Harris's curious use of color. Although, in my opinion, all the cards are exot-
ically beautiful, there are a few of them that I have a hard time looking at for any
length of time without feeling a bit nauseous. Perhaps this was her intention for
cards such as the Seven of Cups (Debauch) or the Nine of Swords (Cruelty), but
it is also obvious that her choice of colors was dictated by something other than
aesthetics. That something other was the fourfold color scale developed by the
adepts of the Golden Dawn.
    Imagine, if you will, that the consciousness of the supreme deity is pure light
(a venerable universal concept to be sure). Now imagine the divine light passing
through a prism and diffusing on the other side into all the colors of the spectrum.
This is one way Qabalists (and physicists) visualize the process of creation—pure
light (divine consciousness) breaking up and slowing down to become units of
energy, mind, and matter.
    The magick prism that does all this primal light shattering is none other than
731° YHVH itself, who, true to its fourfold nature, divides the light into four
vibratory frequencies that will eventually manifest as four scales of color.The King
scale is the highest, and represents the essence—the invisible foundation of color.
With the Queen scale, color actually manifests as the eye beholds it (shades, primary
and secondary colors, etc.). The Prince scale combines the colors of the King and
66                                             Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


Queen scales, and the Princess scale represents the lowest, most mixed and pol-
luted levels of light.
       Now imagine four Trees of Life, one for each of the four Qabalistic worlds.
The light of the King scale filters through and paints the ten sephiroth and twenty-
two paths of the Tree of Life representing the highest world, Atziluth. The light
of the Queen scale filters through and paints the sephiroth and paths of the tree of
the next lower world, Briah. The light of the Prince scale filters through and paints
the tree ofYetzirah, the next lower world. And finally, the light of the Princess scale
filters through and paints the Tree of Life of the lowest world, Assiah.
       At the end of the day, we have a total of forty colors representing the aces and
small cards and ninety-six colors representing the trumps.” Appendix B in The Book
of
Thoth itemizes these colors in four pages of well-organized charts.” I refer you to
my versions, Tables 4 and 5. For the most part, these charts are arranged according
to the Sepher Yetzirah’s thirty-two paths of wisdom Key scale:”


     * Key numbers 1 through 10 refer to the ten sephiroth of the Tree of Life (in
       the tarot, these ten are the ace and the nine small cards of each suit);
     * Key numbers 11 through 32 refer to the twenty-two paths of the Tree of Life
       that connect the sephiroth. The twenty-two Hebrew letters are positioned
       on these paths. In the tarot, these are, of course, the twenty-two trumps.”
     * The tarot trumps are numbered 0-21. Do not confuse these numbers with
       the Key numbers.


       Now that we know that the Thoth Tarot is theoretically splashed with one
hundred thirty-six colors, we might well ask where these colors came from. The
very specific names for many of them were unromantically lifted directly from the
labels of tubes of Winsor and Newton water colors (Designers Gouache series),
which were popular with Victorian artists and are still available from W&N today.
But just who was it who assigned them to their particular Qabalistic pigeonholes?
The answer, like most other matters concerning the Thoth Tarot, is complex and
open to some speculation.
       There is very little debate that the four scales of color issued as part of the
Golden Dawn curriculum were ultimately set down by S. L. MacGregor Mathers.
It is also clear that he had help from others, including someone who was very knowl-
edgeable in color theory. This was most likely his artist wife, Moina.
    The Qabalah, of course, was a major influence in the selection of colors. The
mere fact that the degeneration of colors represents a “fall” down the four Trees of
Life is proof of that. The King scale appears to be the result of a battle between the
red of severity and the white of mercy, as outlined in sections of the Zodar. In other
scales, we see the elemental, planetary, and zodiacal colors familiar to us from the
Sepher Yetzirah. But Qabalah is not the only tradition Mathers and company drew
                        TABLE 4. COLORS ATTRIBUTED TO THE TRUMPS

Key   |Card   Trump Title
Scale| #       & Altribute      Knight Scale | Queen Scale | Prince Scale            Princess Scale
ri to | TeFod                   BrightPale                                     |
                                                   Shy Blue Blue Emerald|Emerald
                  (Air)           yellow                           green             flecked Gold
              The Magus                                                                  Indigo,
 1211 | (fercury)                 Yellow | Puple | Grey                               rayed  Violet
               Hi                                    ;           Cold Pale                  Silver,

 413          The Empress        Emerald           Sky Blue     Early Spring                 ¢ or cerise,
                (Venus)            Green                           Green            rayed pale green
      ne | Scarlet | Red             Brillant | Glowing Red
 16 | 5 ee Red Orange | Deep Indigo Deep warm   Rich Brown
              The Lovers                                         New Yellow          Reaaish Grey,
 17 | 6        (Gemini)           Orange | Pale Mauve)                hor          inclinedto
              The Chanot                                         Rich bright               greenish
                                                                                     DarkBrown
 18 | 7         (Cancer)          Amber            Maroon          Russet
                    j            Emerala                            Deep
                                      Green          Blue        Blue-Green            Pale Green

                                iyelinciany | Slate Grey | Green Grey |               Plum colour
                                      Violet         Blue | Rich Purple               carlin
                                      Yellow                                                 .
                                 (greenish)       Deep Purple        Grey          om Amber

            ite)Man Deep Blue | Sea-green Deepep ove
23 412 The Hanged                                 Olive-                                    Pyite,sae
24 | 13         (Scorpio)        Green Blue | Dull Brown very dark Livid indigo Brown
 25 [141      (Sogntius) |            Bue | Yellow | Green | Dark vivid Blu
           The Devil
 26 115 | (capricom y | Indigo
                            .
                               | Black | Blue-black                                  speak toi
               The lower                                               .             rig.             rayed
 27 | 16         (Mars)            Scarlet     Red | Venetian Red | azure or emerald
               jie Str |            violet | Sty Blue | Blush Mumve| Wine Hi!
 29 | 18
               ‘The Moon
                 (Pisces)
                                  Crimson _| Buff, flecked|Lt. Translucent
                                (ultra Violet) nos White | pinkish Brown              Stone colour
 30 | 19        "Ga                Orange _| Gold Yel ow| Rich Amber Amber, rayed Red
                The Acon = |Glowing Orange               :,,.   |scarletflecked|    Vermillion, flecked
 31 | 20    (Fire) Scarlet BF Vermillion Gold __| crimson and Emerald
 32 [21 | foam | Indigo | Black | Blue-blac                rayed Blue
                                Citrine, Olive,     Amber | Dark Brown
                                                                                      Black, flecked
                                                                                         Yellow
                                Russet&Black

                                White merging |Deep Purple         P                             ,
                                  :                                 colours         Yellow, Blue, Black
                                  into Grey | nearly Black) ies casi                        this case)
68                                                                   Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


                         Taste 5. Cocors ATTRIBUTED TO THE SMALL Carps


 Key      |Card Sephira              Knight Scale|          Queen Scale                Prince Scale | Princess Scale
Scale|       #                          WANDS                   CUPS                    SWORDS                      DISKS
     1 | Ace | Kether                   Brilliance          White Brilliance           White Brilliance _ | White, flecked Gold

     2 | Two        |Chockmah | Pure soft Blue                    Grey                _Blue peari Grey, | White, flecked Red,
                                                                                     like mother of pearl |     Blue and Yellow


     3 | Three}        Binah            Crimson                   Black                  Dark Brown =| Grey, flecked Pink

     4 | Four | Chesed                 Deep Violet                Blue                   Deep Purple              Deep are,

     5 | Five | Geburah                  Orange               Scarlet Red               Bright Scarlet      | Red, flocked Black

     6   | Six     | Tiphareth     |Clear Pink Rose |        Yellow (gold)               Rich Salmon              Gold Amber


     7 | Seven] Netzach                  Amber                  Emerald             Bright Yellow-Green | Olive, flecked Gold

     8     Eight        Hod               Violet                Orange                    Red Russet            Yellowish-Brown,
                                                                                                                  flecked White

     9 | Nine | Yesod                     Indigo                 Violet                Very dark Purple              Citrine,
                                                                                                                           azure


     10 | Ten        Malkuth              Yellow         Citrine (N) Olive (E) | As Queen Scale but               Black, rayed
                                                          ReetWw) & Black | Gold, flecked Black                       Yellow


 Citrine combines blue, red, and yellow with a predominance of yellow; olive, with a predominance of blue; russet,    with a
 predominance of red; and these represent respectively the airy, watery, and fiery subelements. Black is the earthy part of earth.


upon for inspiration. Astrology and alchemy are also rich in color symbolism and
traditions that surely influenced many of the color selections. Perhaps most intrigu-
ing is the likelihood that some colors were selected as the result of magically induced
visions. Skrying in the spirit vision and aura experiments were part and parcel of
the Golden Dawn curriculum. The various rays and flecks found in the suit of Disks
are especially characteristic of such astral visions.
     I would love to be able to tell you that Lady Harris simply chose the domi-
nant colors for the individual cards directly from the appropriate box in the four
scale charts. But, if we spend just a few minutes with the cards and the charts, we
see that this is not the case. If we look deeper, however, we discover that Harris
does most certainly use the scale charts and with the greatest skill and innovative
genius. Let’s take the Six of Wands as an example:
     If we look to the column representing Wands (Knight scale) in table 5 and
refer to the Key scale #6, we find that the color for the Six of
                                                               Wands should be clear
pink rose.There is no (or very little) clear pink rose in the Six of Wands, however.
As a matter of fact, the background is violet and purple, and the wands themselves
are greenish yellow, outlined with reddish amber. Two of the wands on the card are
Worlds ofColor                                                                    69


surmounted by winged solar disks with bright blue feathers and blue uraeus ser-
pents outlined in yellow. Where did these colors come from?
    In chapter 14, I will discuss how each of the thirty-six small cards represents
one decan (period of ten degrees) of the zodiac. Each is also assigned a planet.
The Six of Wands represents the planet Jupiter in the second decan of Leo. If we
look at Key scale #19 (Leo) on table 4, we find the colors yellow (greenish), deep
purple, grey, and reddish amber. If we look at Key scale #21 (Jupiter), we find the
colors violet, blue, rich purple, and bright blue rayed with yellow. A perfect match.
    Not all the cards are so easily analyzed. Instead of using the colors separately,
as she does in the Six of Disks, Harris often blends two or more colors that repre-
sent contending or inharmonious astrological or elemental aspects. This is more
apparent in the higher-numbered cards, which represent lower sephiroth on the
Tree of Life and therefore characterize more imbalanced and polluted forces.
    No matter how difÏcult it may be to work out the method of the color mad-
ness of every card in the Thoth Tarot, we can be relatively confident that Lady
Harris was not careless or arbitrary in her selections.* Her painstaking efforts to
express in colors the complex and wonderful forces of the universe resulted in the
creation of a unique and powerful meditative tool. Each time we work with the
cards—each time we lay them out and allow our eyes to drink in their interwoven
and interconnected colors—we silently activate those same connective webs of uni-
versal influences within ourselves.
                        CHAPTER                      ELEVEN
                                                Va


                                             FJ}

          THE HOLY GUARDIAN ANGEL


    Here at the remotest outpost ofthe divine empire lies a buried treasure. Because the

    inferior agrees with the superior, the genetic code ofKether and the entire involving/
    evolving universe sleeps like a dormant seed inside each ofus. It takes a gardener to
    awaken andgerminate this seed, and that gardener is the Vau' ofthe ineffable name,
    our Holy Guardian Angel.””


In Magick, Crowley wrote,


    The Single Supreme Ritual is the attainment of the Knowledge and
    Conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel. It is the raising of the complete
    man in a vertical straight line. Any deviation from this line tends to become
    black magic. Any other operation is black magic.”


    “Oh my goodness!” I hear many ofyou gasping. “Guardian Angels! Black magic!
I knew thisDuQuette fellow was up to no good! I just wanted to understand a little
more about the Thoth Tarot. Now we’re talking about angels and black magic!
What amI getting into? Where’s it going to stop—human sacrifice?”
    Having come this far with me, I hope you are not harboring any such fears. It
would be foolish indeed, because the subject of the Holy Guardian Angel is just
that—holy. It is directly related to the spiritual evolution of each and every one of
us, No matter what our religion or philosophy. It also has everything to do with the
structure and behavior of tarot, especially the unique and mysterious status of the
Princess court cards and the small cards, aces, and tens.
The Holy Guardian Angel                                                            7


    Hang on to your hats. I'll try to make this short. But please, don’t skip over
this part. It is the last and most important of the little bits of things you should
know before beginning your study of Aleister Crowley’s Thoth Tarot.
    In 1888, S. L. MacGregor Mathers translated an unusual text, The Book ofthe
Sacred Magic ofAbra-Melin the Mage as Delivered byAbraham the Jew unto His Son
Lamech, a Grimoire ofthe Fifteenth Century.” The original manuscript was first writ-
ten down in Hebrew by the famous Qabalist and magician, Abraham the Jew, in
1458. It was housed in the Bibliotheque de l’Arsenal in Paris and translated into
French in the late seventeenth century. It is a fascinating book of technical magic.
The following is excerpted from my Angels, Demons, and Gods ofthe New Millennium.


    Abra-Melin reveals that each of us is linked to a spiritual being whom he
    calls the Holy Guardian Angel. Until we have become spiritually wedded to
    this being, we are not fully equipped as human beings to rule the denizens of
    our lower nature or advance spiritually. The primary focus of the Abra-
    Melin operation is union (Knowledge and Conversation) with one’s Holy
    Guardian Angel. Until this is accomplished, it is useless to even attempt to
    manipulate the circumstances of life because we are as yet spiritually unpre-
    pared to adequately comprehend the nature of our true will, and so incom-
    petent to exercise that will upon the cosmos. After Knowledge and
    Conversation is achieved the Angel becomes the magician’s counselor and
    directs from a position of supreme wisdom all subsequent magical activities.
         While the term “Holy Guardian Angel” used in this capacity appears to
    have originated with the Sacred Magic ofAbra-Melin the Mage, the concept
    of a personal divine entity is unquestionably much older. Zoroaster” writes
    of the Agathosdaimon, a personal guardian spirit who must be contacted
    before any theurgic ceremony is initiated. ... The Platonic philosophers
    taught that between humanity and the gods there exists an intermediate
    class of spiritual beings called Daemonos. Each individual is assigned a per-
    sonal daemon and it is the daemon, not the gods, who directly hears and
    answers the prayers of our race. Socrates called his daemon “genius.”
         Spirit guides, who from prehistoric times have shepherded the
    shamanic visions of every culture on earth, serve to demonstrate that
    Knowledge and Conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel is a fundamental
    and universal spiritual experience. Jesus said, “. .. no man cometh unto the
    Father but by me.” Krishna told Arjuna, “Only by single-minded devotion I
    may in this form be known and seen in reality, and also entered into.”
    Everywhere we look within the sacred writings and spiritual practices of the
    world’s religions we find the basic theme of a personal relationship with a
    spiritual being who is the representative of, or the conduit to, a supreme (and
    perhaps impersonal) deity. So ingrained is this basic truth upon the collec-
72                                               Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


       tive unconscious of the race that we find it embedded deeply in our myths
       and fairy tales. It takes no stretch of the imagination to see the H.G.A. as
       the prince who awakens with a kiss (Knowledge and Conversation) the
       sleeping beauty (the unenlightened soul), and takes her to the palace of his
       father the king (God), where the new couple will eventually become king
       and queen themselves (supreme enlightenment and re-absorption into god-
       head)....
           The Holy Guardian Angel is more than the projected image of our per-
       fected self, or the voice of our conscience; it is more than the innocent,
       inherent knowledge between right and wrong; it is more than the divine ear
       that hears us when we look to heaven and pray .. .“Oh God. . . if you just
       get me out of this, I'll never do anything so stupid again!” But what that
       “more than’ is is difÏcult to discuss."

       DifÏcult indeed, but we must try to discuss it if we are going to understand
how this relates to tarot. Let’s expand the fairytale analogy and look at the charac-
ters as if they were the letters 7 17° YHVH and see where they might live on the
Tree of Life. Please remember that every time I talk about the Tree of Life, I am talk-
ing about more than just great cosmological abstractions. I’m talking about you and
me. Each of us is an individual living, breathing Tree of Life. Every Tree of the four
Qabalistic worlds, every path, every sephira has its counterpart in our own bodies,
our own minds, our own spirits, our own souls.
    Ultimately,all the characters in our fairytale are already
                                                           living in the first sephira,
Kether (the ace of each suit). Of course, they will only realize this in the timeless
moment of ecstasy when they and all the units of consciousness in the cosmos finally
wake up and realize we are one big consciousness. For practical purposes of dis-
cussion, however, we can safely say that:


     * The ace is Kether, the Monad—the environment of supreme deity—above
       all concepts of duality, above the separation of male/female/King/Queen.
     * Our fairytale King is the Yod of YHVH, and lives in the second sephira,
       Chokmah. (His head, however, like the pointy little tip of the Hebrew letter
       Yod, really pokes up into Kether. But, as long as the King identifies himself
       as King, he is unaware of his more exalted identity and has convinced himself
       that he lives in Chokmah.)
     ° The Queen is the first Hé in YHVH, and lives in the third sephira, Binah.
     ¢ It is only fitting that this royal couple lives above the Abyss in the supernal
       triad. They unite and become one, as good couples should, and for a moment
       enjoy the ecstasy of being one (Kether). Then, after a cosmic cigarette, the
       King rolls over and goes to sleep. As the King snores away in Chokmah, the
       Queen becomes aware that, in this brief moment of ecstasy, she has become
The Holy Guardian Angel                                                                73


    pregnant with twins. She eventually delivers. The two babies (a Prince and a
     Princess) plop out below the Abyss. The Prince doesn’t fall too far from the
    supernal triad palace, but the Princess slides all the way to the bottom,
    Malkuth.
  * The young Prince is the Vau in YHVH. He's a bright boy and organizes a
    neatly ordered principality in sephiroth four through nine. These six
    sephiroth are often referred to in Qabalistic literature as the macrocosm, the
    greater world. Even though his principality is all six sephiroth of the
    macrocosm, our        fairytale Prince's headquarters and main corporate ofÏce is
    in the sixth sephira, Tiphareth. (By the way, in our personal Tree of Life, the
    Prince is our own Holy Guardian Angel. Can you see where this is
    heading?)
  ¢ The Princess is the final Hé in YHVH, and is literally trapped in the tenth
    sephira, Malkuth. In Qabalistic literature, Malkuth is often referred to as
    the microcosm, the lesser world. If the Princess were not sleeping most of
    the time, we would see that she is a very complicated and confused
    character. She, of course, is the daughter of the King and Queen, but,
    mysteriously, she belongs to an even younger generation than that of her
    brother, the Prince. As a matter of fact, even though she is closely related
    to the King, Queen, and Prince, her magical genes are so polluted and far
    enough removed from those of the rest of the family that, should she marry
    her brother, the Prince, it would not even be considered incest in a court of
    cosmic family law.


    You've probably guessed that you andI are the fairytale Princess. We are almost
completely asleep to the larger spiritual reality and are restlessly thrashing around
in the bed of the material plane, trying to understand everything with our laugh-
ably inadequate senses, and explain it with our laughably inadequate language. It’s
kind of depressing, isn't it?
    Nevertheless, we quite literally have an ace up our sleeves, because, low as the
Princess is on the Tree of Life—banished as she is from the supernal triad, separated
as she is from her brother/lover the Prince in his macrocosmic principality, trapped
as she in a microcosmic tomb of matter—the Princess is the most important char-
acter in our mystic fairytale.
    Her importance lies in the fact that she is the lowest of the low, and is the key
to the “general doctrine that the climax of the Descent into Matter is the signal for
the redintegration by Spirit” that I mentioned briefly in chapter 8. No other char-
acter in our   fairytale (except the inscrutable singularity that is Kether/ace) has what
the Princess has, that is, a little bit of everything from the highest-high to the
lowest-low. As Proclus wrote, “The heaven is in the earth, but after an earthly
manner; ... and the earth is in the heaven, but after a heavenly manner.”
74                                            Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


    The Holy Guardian Angel/Prince doesn't have any lowest of the low. He’s
stuck in cosmic middle management and passionately needs a bit of the Princess’
divine DNAif he is ever going to clone himself back to being a King. One kiss
from the Princess is all it will take. He will then wake up and realize he is King,
which will cause the Princess to wake up more and realize she is his bride, the
Queen. These two newlyweds will then unite in a cosmic orgasm that explodes and
melts away all sense of separateness. In the truest sense, the King (Chokmah) and
Queen (Binah) are again annihilated
                                  in the one eternal moment they realize that they
are not two, but one (Kether).
     From an alchemical point of view, the King and Queen's ecstatic dissolution
was caused by the universal solvent, vitriol (see page 135). The Princess was the
hidden stone and she certainly   was buried in the interior parts of the earth, and she
certainly got herself rectified by marrying the Prince and becoming Queen, and so
on ad infinitum.
       And does everyone live happily ever after? Well, after a fashion.
       Unfortunately, the cycle immediately repeats itself because, when the ecstatic
afterglow of the realization of oneness wears off, the Queen once again finds her-
self pregnant. The King again falls asleep and awaits the Queen's loving nudge. Of
course, she will only be in the mood to give the old man the nudge when she is
comforted by the fact that the royal children are once again safely home.
    This dynamic and somewhat incestuous love story is the secret of YHVH. It
is the electricity of creation—a divine alternating current coursing eternally in two
directions at the same time—from ace to Princess, from Princess to ace.
     I hope my little fairytale has helped you more clearly understand the dynam-
ics of this universal formula. Many of you may even think that I was being overly
childish in my narrative. Crowley's version is decidedly more adult and ultimately
far more informative. As we learned in chapter 7, he delighted in using wild and
blasphemous words and imagery to communicate perfectly wholesome spiritual
concepts.


     * Crowley’s Queen is the “Whore of Babalon, Mother of Abominations”;
     * Crowley's King is the “Beast, the All-father, Chaos”;
       When Crowley's King and Queen unite, it is “Babalon Riding the Beast”;
       Crowley's returning new-wedded Prince and Princess are (is) the “Blood of
       the Saints’;
       Crowley’s Queen does not just rejoice at the homecoming of the royal
       children, she throws a cosmic party and becomes “drunk of the Blood of the
       Saints”;
       Instead of a Queen who politely nudges her King awake to make love, we
       have Babalon the Great in her whoredom, awakening the “poison of the Eld”
       of the All-Father, and then once again “mounting the Beast.”
The Healy Guardian Angel                                                             5

     I again remind you that, when we talk about these characters, we are talking
about aspects of ourselves and levels of consciousness most of us have yet to expe-
rience. If we could wake up and see the big picture, we would realize that we are at
once the ace, King, Queen, Prince, and Princess of this cosmic fairytale. But we are
not awake. As Rabbi Ben Clifford says,


     The you that you think is you is not you. It is a dream you. In fact, the you
     that you think is you is a dreamer inside a dreamer inside a dreamer inside a
     dreamer. You are the King of the universe who has fallen asleep and is
     dreaming he is the Queen who has fallen asleep and is dreaming she is the
     Prince who has fallen asleep and is dreaming he is a sleeping Princess.


     In a most personal and intimate way, each of us is the sleeping Princess. Each
of us waits as a bride-to-be for the kiss of our Prince (our Holy Guardian Angel)
and the return to our spiritual estate. Recall Crowley’s quote at the beginning of
this chapter.


     The Single Supreme Ritual is the attainment of the Knowledge and
     Conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel. It is the raising of the complete
     man in a vertical straight line. Any deviation from this line tends to become
     black magic. Any other operation is black magic.


     The vertical straight line is the raising of our consciousness from Malkuth—
10 (the sephira of the microcosm) to Tiphareth—6 (the central sephira of the macro-
cosm). Until this is accomplished, until each of us has united our microcosm with
the macrocosm of the Holy Guardian Angel, we not playing with a full deck. We
are not balanced enough to know good from evil, and all our actions tend to become
“black magic.”
     Crowley devised a magical word to illustrate knowledge of and conversation with
the Holy Guardian Angel. He mentions it several times in The Book of Thoth and
Lady Harris incorporates it graphically in the trump card the Chariot. It is a word
that symbolizes the union of the numbers five and six—five representing the micro-
cosm (the little world centered in Malkuth, you and me, the Princess); six repre-
senting the macrocosm, (the big world centered in Tiphareth, the Holy Guardian
Angel). The magical word is ABRAHADABRA. It is composed offive As amid six
other letters.


KING OR KNIGHT? QABALISTIC ROMANCE
Before we get too far away from our fairytale, I need to bring up something very
important. The four royal characters in the above story are called King, Queen,
76                                            Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


Prince, and Princess. The court cards of the original Golden Dawn deck were titled
exactly the same. Each suit had a King on a horse, a Queen on a throne, a Prince
in a chariot, and a standing Princess. With only one exception, the court cards of
the Thoth Tarot are titled and positioned the same way. The exception is, Crowley
uses the title Knight instead of King. His reason for doing so is “Qabalistic Romance.”
Simply put, a knight is sexier than a king.
     In the imagery of cosmic chivalry, the knight on horseback wins his queen,
the old king’s daughter, and replaces the old king on the throne. If we were to
project this dynamic upon our fairytale, the Knight would be the character who
wins and makes love to the Queen, and a King is the guy who afterward turns
around and falls asleep. Crowley considered the more active, virile concept of the
Knight to be the most appropriate title and character for the court card that rep-
resents the Yod in YHVH.
     While I’m on the subject of sexy tarot cards, I would surely be remiss in my
pledge to introduce all the little bits of things you should know before beginning your
study of the Thoth Tarot if I didn't spend a little time on an important subject that
dominated a great deal of Crowley’s magical life and influenced profoundly the
nature of the Thoth Tarot—sex magick.


SEX MAGICK, TAROT, AND THE HOLY
GUARDIAN ANGEL
The Magick of    Thelema tells us that


     All Magick is sexual. Indeed, all life is sexual. It is either overt or implied,
     invoked or directed, stored or released. The Mass of the Roman Catholic
     Church is every bit as much a pantomime of the sex act as the “Great Rite”
     of the witches. The real question is “what is sex symbolic of?”!


What do you think of when you hear the words “sex magick”? Maybe you picture
wild orgies where people dress up in bizarre costumes and intone spooky chants
while they perform unspeakable sexual acts upon each other and an assortment of
other creatures and inanimate objects? Perhaps you imagine people being abused by
a diabolical magician and his minions in order to evoke evil spirits. You might even
think that you can join a sex magick cult where (even if you do not possess even a
minimum level of intelligence, attractiveness, social skills, or charm) you will be
rewarded with eager and willing sexual partners. Dream on!
     For nearly thirty years, I have been an active member and ofÏcer of one Crowley's
own magical societies, Ordo Templi Orientis. The O.T.O.is the largest Thelemic
order in the world. It is a fraternal and religious organization that provides degree
initiations and engages in various social and publishing endeavors. Magically, how-
The Holy Guardian Angel                                                               77


ever, the Order exists primarily to protect and perpetuate a particular magical secret
of great potential efÏcacy. The degree structure of the Order is designed to prepare
its most serious and tenacious initiates and provide them with the tools to discover
this secret and use it safely and effectively. This supreme secret is a particular tech-
nique of sexual magick. It is held sacred and secret by members of the Sovereign
Sanctuary of the Gnosis (the Order’s Ninth Degree), whose duty it is to use the
secret for the benefit of his or her spiritual evolution.
    I know it will be a painful revelation for some of you to learn that none of the
fanciful scenes of erotic excess that I’ve described above even remotely resemble
anything that takes place at any O.T.O.degree initiation or any other ofÏcial cer-
emony or activity, public or private. The Order does not read its members’ diaries,
monitor their magical or sexual lives, or violate their bodies. In other words, you
may learn the principles of sex magick in the O.T.O.,but you'll have to practice on
your own.

     Now you may be asking, if the world’s largest sex magick organization isn’t an
orgy cult, then what is sex magick about? My good friend Donald Michael Kraig
gives one very excellent definition: “A variety of techniques which harness the ener-
gies raised during sexual activity and direct them to fulfill the desires of the people
practicing sex magick.”'TM
    The key word in Don's definition is “desires.” What the magician desires is
technically called “the object of the operation.” Desire spells the difference between
an ill-conceived attempt to bewitch your neighbor's cow and the attainment of per-
fect spiritual liberation. I bring all this up in this chapter because nothing should be
more ardently desired than the Holy Guardian Angel. It should not surprise anyone
that the experience of knowledge of and conversation with one’s H.G.A. is often
described as being exquisitely sexual.
     Most everyone knows the ecstasy of orgasm. In that golden moment, our self
is annihilated just like the consciousness of the King and Queen in our fairytale.
In that timeless moment, there is no difference between you and everything else
in the universe—including (potentially) the object of the operation (your heart's
desire). Can't you see how, by working like a disciplined yogi with the forces and ener-
gies that lead up to that timeless moment, a person can literally become one with
the object of their desire and then gestate and eventually give birth to it? This is
technical magick of the highest order and should not be identified in any way with
the prurient shenanigans of sex cults or clubs.
     Human sexuality is only one very narrow expression of this sexual alchemy.
The formula is truly universal and its mechanics are at work at all levels of exis-
tence. It is the magick that turns energy into matter, sunlight into gold, you and
me into God.
    And so ends Part I of this book. I now would like to pause and congratulate you
for enduring all these little bits of things I thought you should know before begin-
7                                             Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


ning your study of Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot. I realize that, for many, it has been
an ordeal. I have done my best to make things as clear as I would have wanted them
presented at the beginning of my studies, but I’m sure there are those who may still
feel hopelessly confused. I hope you will persevere and refer often to the material
in Part | and the definitions in the glossary in chapter 21 as you study the next sec-
tion, which deals with the individual cards.
PART II


The Cards
                       CHAPTER TWELVE

                                          cy
                           INTRODUCTION
                             TO THE CARDS


    I know enough about the works of Aleister Crowley to know that it would be unwise
    for me to presume to interpret him. There is more than enough Crowley material
    available to allow Crowley to explain Crowley. Finding that material when you need
    it, however, can be a problem.’


Now that we are familiar with many of the little bits of things you should know
before beginning your study of Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot, I think we are about
ready to examine the cards themselves without the distraction of having to digress
repeatedly into fundamental discussions of Qabalah, Thelema, alchemy, or Enochiana.
Knowing the place whereonI standest is holy ground, it is with no small measure
of trepidation that 1 begin my comments on the individual cards. I have tried to
the best of my ability to put off the sandals of presumption and keep my personal
speculations and theories to an absolute minimum.
     If I should state, for instance, that the goddess of the Adjustment card is the
Fool's girlfriend, or that the Devil is God as misunderstood by the wicked, or that
the Magus is cursed so that all his words are distorted and misunderstood, it will be
because, somewhere in his voluminous writings, Crowley has said so. 1 make no
apologies for quoting Crowley liberally, and quoting him often, from a number of
texts including
              The Book of Thoth, The Heart ofthe Master,’ Magick, Book IV, The
Equinox, Konx Om Pax, Orpheus, and letters between Crowley and Harris. I have
taken great pains to identify and reference all such quotes. That being said, I must
remind the reader that not every aspect of the Thoth Tarot is new or revolutionary.
Spending  too much time and energy searching for secretCrowleyisms hidden   in every
curious brushstroke or printing flaw is more often a symptom of mental instabil-
ity than spiritual revelation.
82                                             Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


       The fact is that the format and fundamental images of most of the individual
cards of the Thoth Tarot are not the invention of Aleister Crowley. As a member
of the Golden Dawn, Crowley was encouraged to paint his own personal deck using
specific images and colors outlined in Order documents. Lady Harris possessed the
written descriptions and was also familiar with the published deck painted by Pamela
Coleman Smith under the direction of Arthur Edward Waite. In discussing each
card, | will describe the original Golden Dawn design and, as much as possible,
point out similarities and differences.


THE MAJOR AND MINOR ARCANAS
When we break the seal and open a new deck of tarot cards we usually discover
that they are neatly organized and ordered. The first twenty-two cards are num-
bered with roman numerals 0—XXI and are called the Major (or Greater) Arcana.
The remaining fifty-six cards are called the Minor (or Lesser) Arcana and are
divided into four suits. The suits are usually ordered Wands, Cups, Swords, and
Disks. Each suit contains fourteen cards consisting of four court cards ( Knight,
Queen, Prince, and Princess)’ and ten small cards (ace through 10).
   That is how most decks of tarot cards are arranged when they first come from
the manufacturer. However, the true hierarchy of the tarot would have them arranged
as I show below. (The logic behind these divisions will soon become clear.)


     * The twenty-two trumps ordered 0-XX];
     * The four aces ordered Wands, Cups, Swords, and Disks;
     * The sixteen court cards ordered by suit (Wands, Cups, Swords, and Disks)
       and by title (Knight, Queen, Prince, and Princess);
     * The thirty-six small cards ordered by suit (Wands, Cups, Swords, and Disks)
       and by number (2-10).


       From a Qabalistic point of view, the relationship between the two Arcanas is
complex, if not downright inscrutable. I could digress at this point into hundreds
of pages of debate over which Qabalistic world plays host to which Arcana,’ but I
intend to spare us that detour. Crowley said, “the Tarot will lose all its vitality for one
who allows himself to be side-tracked by its pedantry.” I couldn’t agree more, so let's
try to make it easy on ourselves.
       A simple (if not altogether accurate) way of looking at the two Arcanas is by
projecting them upon the pentagram.
       In figure 22, the Major Arcana (the twenty-two trumps or atus) represents
spirit and is placed on the top point of the pentagram. Each trump is, in essence, a
divine personage “possessing its own private, personal and particular Universe.”
Each presents an aspect—a facet of supreme reality. Like the element spirit, the
Introduction to the Cards                                                             83


                                         Trumps

                               Swords              Cups
                                 A                 V


                                  4                A
                                 Disks            Wands


Ficure 22. THE PENTAGRAM OF THE Major AND Minor Argcanas.
                                                      THE Major ARCANA
RULES THE MINOR ARCANA IN THE SAME WAY THAT SPIRIT RULES THE FOUR ELEMENTS.


influence of the trumps pervades all levels of consciousness and creation—attracting,
repelling, connecting, and separating the infinite elemental combinations.
     The Minor Arcana represents the four elemental arms of the pentagram that
spirit (the Major Arcana) simultaneously unites and separates. The cards of the
Minor Arcana are not divine personages, but “primarily sub-Elements, parts of the
‘Blind Forces’ under the Demiourgos, Tetragrammaton.”’
     I know this is a lot to absorb, especially for those of you who are not particu-
larly interested in the details of Qabalistic thought. Perhaps all this will be easier to
understandif we look at it this way:


  ¢ Each trump is a world all its own—one one-twenty-second facet of the
     totality of consciousness—the ultimate spiritual and cosmological reality;
  * Each of the trumps can be thought of as having an entire set of fifty-six
     Minor Arcana cards that it rules and with which it executes its particular
     aspect of influence.


     We could argue quite correctly that there are really 1,232 (22 x 56) tarot cards
in a complete deck; fifty-six cards of the Minor Arcana dutifully playing out their
elemental roles in twenty-two different, but intimately connected, drama/come-
dies written and directed by each of the twenty-two trumps. In The Book ofThoth,
Crowley uses the Three of Disks, Work, as an example of how this plays out:


     The Three ofDisks belonging to the High Priestess or the Lovers might repre-
     sent the establishment of an oracle like that of Delphi. The Hierophant's
     Three ofDisks might point to the construction of a cathedral. The Tower’
     Three ofDisks perhaps indicating the massing of a standing army. The ideas
     that such pairings evoke can be an infinite source of meditation, and an
     invaluable exercise for anyone wishing to use the cards for divination.‘
84                                            Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


     In the pages that follow, I briefly discuss each of the seventy-eight cards of the
Thoth Tarot. I will focus primarily upon the magical and spiritual traditions that gave
birth to it as a tarot entity, and upon demonstrating how the various astrological
and Qabalistic components blend to create each card’s unique character. (For div-
inatory meanings and Crowley's method of divination, see chapter 20.) Wherever
possible, I also include excerpts of letters between Harris and Crowley concerning
the card. I find these particularly interesting.
     Now on to the seventy-eight cards of the Thoth Tarot. We will start with the
Major Arcana.
                     CHAPTER THIRTEEN

                                              CH
                             INTRODUCTION
                  TO THE MAJOR ARCANA


    All these old letters ofmy Book are aright but % ts not the Star. This ts also secret: my
    prophet shall reveal it to the wise.’


Nobody really knows where tarot cards originated. Obviously, they could not have
existed as cards before the invention of paper. As a matter of fact, we cannot with
any degree of certainty trace them any further back than northern Italy in the first
half of the fifteenth century, where they were called carte da trionfi (cards of the tri-
umph) and used to play a game similar to modern bridge. Later, in the 1530s, the
cards became known as ¢arocchi (singular form tarocco, meaning “tarot”).
     Early examples displayed imagery that inspired the imaginations ofthe Renaissance
elite—ancient gods, heroes, virtues, vices, and principals enthroned in chariots and
“trumping” one another by order of importance as part of a great triumphal proces-
sion. These were later supplemented with other figures, including mystical images
from the prophetic books of the Old and New Testaments. Still later, Masonic con-
cepts like the four public and private virtues of Temperance, Fortitude (Strength),
Justice, and Prudence (Lovers?) all make their appearance in tarot decks.


THE ORDERING OF THE TRUMPS
For the most part, the individual trump cards of the Thoth Tarot should be imme-
diately recognizable to anyone who is familiar with the traditional images of tarot.
The Aeon is the most striking exception.
    In the Thoth Tarot, the twenty-two trumps are formally referred to as “Atus of
Tahuti.” According to Crowley, “Atu” was Ancient Egyptian for “house” or “key”;
Tahuti is the God Thoth (the Egyptian Hermes, or Mercury). He also informs us
86                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


that the word “atout” is short for the French phrase, don 4 tout, meaning “good for
anything,” or what card players call a “wild card.”
     The earliest decks did not have titles printed on the trumps themselves, and the
number of trumps and their ordering differed. As early as the 1490s, however, a
basic collection of twenty-two characters and images, ordered more or less as we
find them in modern decks, appeared as the standard model throughout Europe.
     There is no real evidence that this standardization was the result of anything
more occult or mysterious than the natural congealing of the conventions of a pop-
ular game. Nevertheless, that phenomenon in itself may have profound implica-
tions concerning how the human mind is hardwired to respond to archetypal images.
     In a time when artificial images were limited to rare paintings, statuary, and
architecture, the introduction of a portable pack of colorful images that could be
viewed and enjoyed at one’s leisure for hours on end must have had as much impact
upon the psyche of fifteenth-century Europe as photography and motion pictures
had upon that of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
     With one exception, the Atus, or trumps, of the Thoth Tarot conform to the
Tarot de Marsielles sequence, which is the same as that originally established by the
deck of Catelin Geoffroy in 1557. The Thoth Tarot also follows, with one exception,
the Golden Dawn's secret scheme of attributing certain Hebrew letters and their cor-
responding elemental, planetary, or zodiacal attributions. That one exception has
been, and continues to be, the source of much discussion and argument among stu-
dents of modern occultism. In the next few pages, I will do my best to explain why the
Thoth Tarot attributes the Hebrew letter Tzaddi (%) to the fourth trump, the Emperor,
and the Hebrew letter Hé (7) to the seventeenth trump, the Star instead of the other
way around. It is all because of one sentence of one verse of The Book ofthe Law: “All
these old letters of my Book are aright; but ¥ is not the Star.""
     Don’t feel badly if, at first, you find what follows difÏcult to understand. Lady
Harris was quite frank with Crowley about her confusion.


     Also I don’t feel you have made it clear about Tzaddi—The Emperor. Can't
     you have a diagram? I have been reading your book to Ann Christie in the
     evenings & altho she is very interested she could not understand your book
     and I am not sure I did in the end. It will be a point about which there will
     be the most argument. Is there any reason for the 2 loops except secrecy?
     Sure! & if not why not undo the loop & is the Emperor to be numbered 17
     or IV or 4 or 17 ditto Star also Strength XI and Justice VIII. I expect I have
     still got it all wrong but if I have, you must be clearer because I am only just
     below sub-normal intelligence. A bientot.”


     I wish we had Crowley’s response to the above letter. It might have been some-
thing like his commentary on this verse later published inThe Law Is for All:
Introduction to the Major Arcana                                                           87


     I see no harm in revealing the mystery of Tzaddi to “the wise”; others will
     hardly understand my explanations. Tzaddi is the letter of the Emperor, the
     Trump IV, and Heé is the Star, the Trump XVII. Aquarius and Aries are
     therefore counterchanged, revolving on the pivot of Pisces, just as in the
     Trumps VIII and XI, Leo and Libra, do about Virgo. This last revelation
     makes our Tarot attributions sublimely, perfectly, flawlessly symmetrical.”


    Without illustrations, this explanation is rather hard to picture. The Book of
Thoth contains diagrams and tables that do not always agree with each other. What
follows is my best attempt to sort things out.
    The adepts of the Golden Dawn, (working from existing and or innovated
esoteric doctrine) assigned Hebrew letters to each of the trumps. Among many
other things, these twenty-two Hebrew letters also represent the three primitive
elements, seven planets, and twelve signs of the zodiac.


       Tasce 6. THE TRADITIONAL SEQUENCE UsiNG THE TITLES OF THE THOTH
                      Tarot AND GoLpEN Dawn ATTRIBUTES

                               Title
       Tetons!          posers aah      Hetqecace| The 22 Hebrew Letters
           0       FOOL                          1   Aleph (Air)
           I       MAGUS                     2       Beth (Mercury)
           2       HIGH PRIESTESS            3       Gimel (Moon)
           3       EMPRESS                   4       Daleth (Venus)
           4       EMPEROR                   5       Hé (Aries)
           5       HIEROPHANT                6       Vau (Taurus)
           6       LOVERS                    7       Zain (Gemini)
           7       CHARIOT                   8       Cheth (Cancer)
           8       ADJUSTMENT*          c 12         Lamed (Libra)* <=
                            _                        (Teth-Leo belongs here in sequence)

           9       HERMIT               i    10      Yod (Virgo)
          10       FORTUNE              i   il       Kaph (Jupiter)
          11       LUST*                tH» 9        Teth (Leo)                   _—
                                                     (Lamed-Libra
                                                         belongs here in sequeace)

          12       HANGED MAN                13      Mem (Water)
          13       DEATH                     14      Nun (Scorpio)
          14__|    ART                       15      Samekh (Sagittarius
          15       DEVIL                     16      Ayin |   icormn
          16        TOWER                    17      Pé (Mars)
          17        STAR                     18      Tzaddi (A     ius
          18        MOON                     19      Qoph (Pisces)
          19      | SUN                      20      Resh (Sun)
          20        AEON                     21      Shin (Fire & Spirit)
          21        UNIVERSE                 22      Tau (Saturn & Earth)
88                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


     With only two exceptions (as indicated in table 6 by the double arrows), the order
of the twenty-two trumps neatly follows the sequential order of the twenty-two
letters of the Hebrew alphabet. The exceptions to this otherwise tidy arrangement
relate to the traditional positioning of two trumps, 8 (Adjustment, Justice in older
decks) and 11 (Lust, Strength in older decks). If we were to follow the natural order
of the Hebrew alphabet, Adjustment would be assigned the ninth letter,Teth (which
represents the zodiacal sign of Leo), and Lust would be assigned the twelth Hebrew
letter, Lamed (which represents the zodiacal sign of Libra). This is not the case,
and the adepts of the Golden Dawn made the correction.
     This is easier to see in table 7, which shows only the zodiacal trumps. Notice
how, by making Strength (Lust) trump number 8 and assigning it the Hebrew letter
Teth, and by making Justice (Adjustment) trump number 11 and assigning it the
Hebrew letter Lamed, the Golden Dawn arrangement restores the natural order
to the signs of the zodiac and to the Hebrew alphabet.
     As tidy and logical as this switch is, it nevertheless disturbs the traditional
sequence of trumps, and this bothered many Golden Dawn members, including
Crowley. The Thoth Tarot follows the Golden Dawn model in that it assigns Teth/Leo
to the Lust card and Lamed/Libra to the Adjustment card, but it retains the tradi-
tional sequence of Lust as the eleventh and Adjustment as the eighth trump.


                       Taste 7.GOLDEN DAWN ARRANGEMENT:
            THe NATURAL SEQUENCE OF THE SIGNS OF THE ZODIAC AND THE
                            Hesrew ALPHABET REsToRED


                                              .   .          12 Hebrew Letters
      Trump         ettTans)              Zodiac Sign Representing Zodiac Signs
        4       EMPEROR                  Aries                Hé
        5       HIEROPHANT_|_ Taurus                          Vau
        6       LOVERS                   Gemini              Zain
        7       CHARIOT                  Cancer              Cheth
        8       LUST* _                  Leo                 Teth*
        9       HERMIT                   Virgo               Yod
       11       ADJUSTMENT*|_            Libra               Lamed*
       13       DEATH                    Scorpio             Nun
       14       ART                      Sagittarius         Samekh
       ih       DEVIL                    Capricom            Ayin
       17       STAR                     Aquarius            Tzaddi
       18       MOON                     Pisces               Qoph
Introduction to the Mayor Arcana                                                      89


       If we were to project this change upon the belt of the zodiac, it would be as if
a twist or loop is formed around the sign of Virgo, changing the natural order of signs
from Leo-Virgo-Libra to Libra-Virgo-Leo.
       Figure 23 shows the natural order of the signs of the zodiac; figure 24 shows
the Leo/Libra twist.


                                   a        ;         ee
                     FiGure 23. NATURAL ORDER OF THE ZODIACAL BELT.


              Ser       Devi        Ant     Death                 Lest

Meee   =a
       a, A: Se S
                                                       — —<——_——
                                                           a
                                                                   a            ip Hermit

            Empower ~ Hicrephant   Levers   Chariot              Adjustment


       Ficure 24. ZODIACAL BELT WITH A TWIST. TETH (LEO) AND LAMED (L1spra) ARE
                    SWITCHED. Note THAT VIRGO RETAINS ITS POSITION.


       This arrangement leaves us with a curious and somewhat imbalanced dia-
gram of the zodiacal belt, but it didn't seem to bother Crowley, at least not until
shortly after twelve noon on April 8, 1904. He was in the middle of receiving the
first chapter of The Book ofthe Law in his hotel room in Cairo. Aiwass, speaking
for the Goddess Nuit, had just dictated the words, “Invoke me under my stars!
Love is the law, love under will. Nor let the fools mistake love; for there are love
and love. There is the dove, and there is the serpent. Choose ye well. He, my
prophet, hath chosen, knowing the law of the fortress, and the great mystery of
the House of God."
       When Crowley “heard” the reference to “the fortress” and “the House of God”
(alternate titles to trump XVI, the Tower), a question arose in his mind concerning
the general correctness of the ordering of the tarot trumps. Instantly, his question
was answered, when Aiwass dictated the next line: “All these old letters of my Book
are aright but is ¥ not the Star.This is also secret: my prophet shall reveal it to the
wise.”
       This comment puzzled Crowley. If Tzaddi was not the Star, then what card
was? And what Hebrew letter should be attributed to the Star card? The answer
go                                              Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


was some time in coming, but when it did come, there was no doubt in Crowley’s
mind that he had figured it out. Tzaddi was the Emperor.


     This card is attributed to the letter Tzaddi, and it refers to the sign of Aries
     in the Zodiac. This sign is ruled by Mars, and therein the Sun is exalted.
     The sign is thus a combination of energy in its most material form with the
     idea of authority. The sign TZ or TS implies t:.is in the original, ono-
     matopoetic form of language. It is derived from Sanskrit roots meaning
     Head and Age, and is found to-day in words like Czsar,Tsar, Sirdar, Senate,
     Senior, Signor, Senor, Seigneur.'*


     The Emperor's old letter was Hé. It would now be attributed to the Star. Hé
is the letter for both female components of YHVH (the Supernal Mother Hé of
Binah, and unredeemed Daughter Hé of Malkuth) and a perfect representation of
the Star Goddess depicted on Atu XVII. Why hadn’t someone thought of this
before?
     Of course, Crowley was not satisfied with just knowing what the switch was;
he had to find a more esoteric and technical reason why Tzaddi was not the Star.
     As we see in table 8 and figure 25, switching the trumps that represent the
Hebrew Letters Hé and Tzaddi upsets the natural order of the signs of the zodiac
on the opposite side of the zodiac, as if another loop had formed on the belt of the
zodiac that twisted around the sign of Pisces and changed the natural order from


          Tasie 8. CROWLEY ARRANGEMENT:
                                    THE NATURAL SEQUENCE OF SIGNS
                   ARRANGED TO ACCOMMODATE THE New Orpver


                             i                  -    og:        12 Hebrew Letters
     Trump          Chott tenes)          Zodiac Sign Representing Zodiac Signs
       a4       EMPEROR                   Artes                 Tzaddii     <=
          s     HIEROPHANT                Taurus                Vau

          6     LOVERS                    Gemini                Zain

          7     CHARIOT                   Cancer                Cheth

       8s       ADJUSTMENT                Libra                 Lamed
       9        HERMIT                    Virgo                 Yod

       aa       LUST                      Leo                   Feth*

       13       DEATH                     Scorpio               Nun

       14       ART                       Sagittarius           Samekh

       1s       DEVIL                     Capricorn             Ayin
       17       STAR                      Aquarius              Hé           —
       18       MOON                      Pisces                Qoph
Introduction to the Major Arcana                                                      91


                                                     Deut                Lest
                                             le
<<
 SS—                                         Hl]   ———_
                                                     Charlot            Adjanmeact


  Ficure 25. ZODIACAL BELT WITH TWO TWISTS. TETH (LEO) AND LAMED (LisRA) ARE
 SWITCHED BY THE GOLDEN Dawn; Emperor (TZADD!) AND Star (HE) ARE SWITCHED
                                       BY CROWLEY.


Aquarius-Pisces-Aries to Aries-Pisces-Aquarius.
     It is likely that there will always be confusion and controversy over this matter.
It doesn’t help that Crowley offers us conflicting diagrams and statements in The
Book ofThoth. The most vexing are:


  * Table XX, which assigns Aquarius to the Emperor and Aries to the Star;
  * The last paragraph of his comments on the Emperor (page 78), where he
     talks of the path of the Emperor as if it held its old position on the Tree of
     Life, joining sephira 2, Chokmah, with sephira 6, Tiphareth.


     Whether this is because of inevitable typographical errors or because of Crowley's
reticence to form a strict doctrine around any particular verse of The Book of the
Law, will probably remain a mystery, but here’s a quick reference that I would loved
to have had at the beginning of my study of the Thoth Tarot. It may not conform
to every statement and diagram in The Book of
                                           Thoth, but it is the most consistent sum-
mary
   I could create.


                                   Trump 4 is the Emperor

  * The zodiac sign assigned to the Emperor is Aries;
  * The Hebrew letter for the Emperor is % Tzaddi (and everything ¥ Tzaddi
     represents);
  * On the Tree of Life, the Emperor is found on path 28, which joins the
     seventh sephira, Netzach, to the ninth sephira, Yesod.


                                   Trump 8 ts Adjustment

  * The zodiac sign assigned to Adjustment is Libra;
  ° The Hebrew letter for Adjustment is 5 Lamed (and everything Lamed
     represents);
  * On the Tree of Life, Adjustment is found on path 22, which joins the fifth
     sephira, Geburah, to the sixth sephira, Tiphareth.
g2                                             Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


                                      Trump 11 1s Lust

     * The zodiac sign assigned to Lust is Leo;
     * The Hebrew letter for Lust is & Teth (and everything Teth represents);
     * On the Tree of Life, Lust is found on path 19, which joins the fourth
       sephira, Chesed, to the fifth sephira, Geburah.


                                   Trump 17   1s the Star

     * The zodiac sign assigned to the Star is Aquarius;
     * The Hebrew letter for The Star is 7 Hé (and everything Hé represents);
     * On the Tree of Life, Hé is found on path 15, which joins the second sephira,
       Chokmah to the sixth sephira, Tiphareth.


THE DIVISION OF THE TRUMPS
There are near infinite ways the twenty-two trumps can be divided and combined
for meditative and instructive purposes. The most obvious, of course, are the divi-
sions by three elemental, seven planetary, and twelve zodiacal cards. Another very
popular method of division places the Fool at the top of three rows of seven cards,
ordered consecutively. Each of the three rows can represent some aspect or quality
of character or consciousness. The cards are then considered as seven columns of three
cards, each relating in some way to each other. For example, the first column would
have the Magus at the top, Adjustment in the middle and the Devil on the bottom,
perhaps suggestive of some cosmic truth relating to the manifest nature of the
Magus, or some such spiritual lesson. Personally, I believe that any way we organ-
ize or combine the cards is a legitimate meditative exercise. After all, the trumps
are a universal alphabet of images and, no matter how we throw them together,
they are bound to spell something.
       Buried in The Book of
                          Thoth, as the last paragraph of his comments on the High
Priestess, Crowley reveals a most remarkable secret concerning the fundamental
nature of the twenty-two trumps:


       It is especially to be observed that the three consecutive letters, Gimel,
       Daleth, Hé (Atu II, II], XVII) show the Feminine Symbol (Yin) in three
       forms composing a Triune Goddess. This Trinity is immediately followed by
       the three corresponding and complementary Fathers, Vau, Tzaddi, Yod (Atu
       IV, V, IX). The Trumps 0 and I are hermaphrodite. The remaining fourteen
       Trumps represent these Primordial Quintessences of Being in conjunction,
       function, or manifestation."
Introduction to the Mayor Arcana                                                       93


    If the above leaves you somewhat unexcited let me get out my Crowlese-English
dictionary and attempt to translate.
     Eight trumps (the Fool, the Magus, the High Priestess, the Empress, the
Emperor, the Hierophant, the Hermit, and the Star) are a special class of trump. They
are primordial quintessences of being. (Just for fun, let’s call these eight first-class
trumps.)
    These first-class trumps are divided by gender into three categories:

  1. The Fool and the Magus are hermaphrodite;
 2. The High Priestess, the Empress, and the Star show the feminine symbol in
     three forms;
  3. The Emperor, the Hierophant, and the Hermit show the masculine symbol in
     three forms. These three correspond and are complementary to the High
     Priestess, the Empress, and the Star (though Crowley is not clear how they are
     paired).


     Each of the remaining fourteen trumps (let's call them second-class trumps) rep-
resents one or more of the first-class trumps, and they do so in one of three ways:


  1. As an expression of the character and behavior of the first-class trump when it
     is combined with one or more of its seven fellows;
 2. As an expression of how the first-class trump functions;
  3. As an expression of how the first-class trump manifests.


     Crowley doesn't give us any examples and leaves us to our own devices as to
how to apply this doctrine, but just a few minutes with the cards can provide much
food for thought. For example (and the most obvious), the second-class trump the
Lovers can be studied as the expression of the character and behavior of first-class
trump the Empress when combined with first-class trump the Emperor (or for that
matter with the High Priestess and the Hermit).
    This exercise, and many more you are likely to discover in your tarot career,
will naturally become more effective (and more fun) as you become more familiar
with the cards. In my opinion, the most important thing to keep in mind is that
none of the trumps (indeed, no single tarot card) stands alone. They are all inti-
mately interconnected. The Major Arcana is one master play with twenty-two mod-
ular acts that can be performed in an infinite numbers of ways.
    That being said, I think it’s time we bring up the curtain and take a look at
our cast of characters. Before we do, however, I would like to remind you that the
tarot tells a story, and like a play or a movie, it is best to see it first from beginning
to end to appreciate its message. Once you are familiar with the actors and plot,
you can skip around to examine your favorite scenes and characters more closely. I
a


94                                          Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


therefore strongly suggest that the first time you read the following sections con-
cerning the individual cards, you do so straight through and in the order they are
presented.
     The tarot's story is your story. Savor it. When you are finished reading it—you
will be someone else.
                 CHAPTER                       FOURTEEN
                                         rom
                                          ZA

                      ATU OF TAHUTI—
       THE MAJOR ARCANA TRUMPS


All these symbols ofthe Trumps ultimately
                                              exist in a region beyond reason and above
tt. The study ofthese cards hasfor its most
                                            important aim the training ofthe mind to
think clearly and coherently in this exalted
                                             manner. This has always been characteristic
ofthe methods ofInitiation as understood
                                           by the hierophants.""
96                                              Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


ATU 0
THE FOOL

                                  The Spirit of the Aether

                                  Elemental Trump of Air

                                  Oniginal Design: A bearded ancient seen in profile.
                                  He laughs, bearing a sphere containing Illusion in
                                  his left hand, but over his right shoulder, a staff
                                  463 lines long in his right. A lion and a dragon are
                                  at his feet, but he seems unaware of their attacks or
                                  caresses.'”

                                  Hebrew Letter: Aleph (ox).

                                  Tree of Life: Path 11, joining ® Kether—Crown to
                                  © Chokmah—Wisdom.

                                  Colors: Bright Pale Yellow; Sky Blue; Blue
                                  Emerald Green; Emerald, flecked Gold.

Know Naught!

All ways are lawful to innocence.

Purefolly is the Key to Initiation.

Silence breaks into Rapture.

Be neither man nor woman, but both in one.
Be silent, Babe in the Egg ofBlue, that thou
mayest grow to bear the Lance and Graal!

Wander alone, and sing! In the King’s palace
his daughter awaits thee.”


     I will struggle with the Fool. He does writhe about. I can’t see him. Has he
     got any children with him & is not his bag a jester's balloon? That innocent
     gaiety asks for the brush of a saint & my lines come out like treacle. I wish I
     could paint in crystals.”!
                                                  —Harris to Crowley date uncertain.


This may seem odd to you, butI am going to open my remarks about the first tarot
trump, the Fool, by quoting what Crowley wrote about the last trump, the Universe:
Atu ofTahuti—the Major Arcana Trumps                                               97


    In the card itself there is consequently a glyph of the completion of the
    Great Work in its highest sense, exactly as the Atu of the Fool symbolizes its
    beginning. The Fool is the negative issuing into manifestation; the Universe
    is that manifestation, its purpose accomplished, ready to return. The twenty
    cards that lie between these two exhibit the Great Work and its agents in
    various stages.”


    In essence, there are not really twenty-two trumps, there is only one—the Fool.
All the other trumps live inside (and issue from) the Fool. Of all seventy-eight tarot
cards, none is more revered and misunderstood. In The Book of Thoth Crowley devotes
over twenty-four pages to this card alone and, in doing so, gives us a whirlwind
tour of the greatest hits of Greek, Roman, Hindu, Hebrew, pagan, and Christian
mythology.
    The most familiar image of the Fool is that of a young vagabond, his head
wreathed with laurel or ivy. He holds a white rose and wears a motley coat. Over his
shoulder rests a staff, at the end of which is tied a bag or satchel. A dog or a croc-
odile sometimes nips at his feet. He strolls mindlessly toward the edge of a high
mountain cliff, his eyes cast irresponsibly skyward. He still has one foot upon the
earth, the other poised to take the fateful step into the abyss. Lady Harris's Fool is
different. This Fool has both feet planted unfirmly in air!
    Why is the Fool such a mysterious and awesome character? Isn't he just another
mediaeval cast member jesting to the Emperor, Empress, and Hierophant? Perhaps.
That picture certainly fits many of the traditional images of this card. From a mys-
tical point of view, however, the Fool is much more (actually, much, much less).
The Fool propounds the ultimate riddle. Creation and the meaning of life are an
incomprehensible joke. The Fool is more than God. The Fool is the “nothing” we
refer to when we say, “Nothing created God. Nothing is beyond God. Nothing is
greater than God.” The Fool is perfectly empty-headed, for if there were anything
inside, his innocence would be destroyed.
    As the first trump it is only logical that the Fool be considered Key number
1. He is not, however, Key number 1. He is Key number 0. This is the Fool’s first
and greatest trick—creating the one (and consequently everything else) out of
nothing.
    “That's crazy!” your rational mind says; and your rational mind is correct—up
to a point. It doesn’t make sense that something can come out of nothing. If we
wanted to personify the irrational concept of something coming from nothing,
however, what better mascot could we choose than that of an idiot who makes no
sense—a fool?
    I have seen several early drafts that Crowley rejected. To my absolute delight,
I discovered that two of them bore the unmistakable image of Harpo Marx. How
perfect! In Marx Brothers’ films, Harpo was the archetypal fool. Even his name
98                                             Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


betrayed his identity. Not only was he the girl-chasing clown who made fools of
all the straightlaced and uptight characters, he did it all without saying a word. He
was silent like the very mythological characters from whom the Fool is constructed;
silent like Harpocrates, the Greek god of innocence; silent like Dionysus when he
was asked by king Pentheus “What is Truth?” silent like Christ standing before
Pilate when he was asked the exact same question.
     The Fool of the Thoth Tarot retains the familiar elements of traditional decks,
but boldly asserts that the character we are dealing with is none other than the
inscrutable supreme deity of every age and culture. He is the pagan Green Man of
spring; Parsifal, the pure fool who wins the Holy Grail; Hoor-Pa-Kraat, the inno-
cent Egyptian lord of silence, who treads upon the crocodile
                                                         god Sebek, the Devourer.
His wild eyes, horns, tiger, pine cones, grapes, and ivy show him to be the secret
essence of the cosmos worshipped for centuries as Dionysus. Dionysus Zagreus,
the horned son of Zeus, and Bacchus Diphues, the drunken and mad omni-sexual
god of divine ecstasy.
     Lady Harris's Fool is a cornucopia of sacred images, many of which reveal
themselves only after long meditation (and the aid of a magnifying glass). He bursts
into midair of existence from behind three swirling rings that issue from and return
to his heart. These are the three veils of negativity (Ain, Ain Soph, and Ain Soph
Aur)” that Qabalists teach gave birth to the singularity of creation. His satchel is
filled with the entire universe in the form of planetary and zodiacal coins.
     The Fool is the Holy Spirit itself. The dove, symbol of the Holy Spirit; the
butterfly, symbol of transformation; winged globe, symbol of Mercurial air; and the
Egyptian vulture-goddess MautTM pour from the Holy Grail in the Fool's right hand.
Like the Virgin Mary, Maut became impregnated by the spirit (breath) of the wind.
“The whole picture,” Crowley tells us, “is a glyph of the creative light.”*
    With that in mind, I would finally like to draw the reader's attention to the
image of the Sun covering the groin area of the Fool, and the almost invisible image
of the Moon directly above the head of the crocodile. Between these two primary
symbols of male and female are what Crowley describes as “twin infants embrac-
ing on the middle spiral. Above them hangs the benediction of three flowers in
one.”
    We can only speculate on the meanings of these symbols. In my opinion, it is
highly likely that they allude, at least in part, to certain aspects of sexual alchemy that
Crowley was not inclined to dwell upon in detail in published material. Certainly,
the powers and unlimited potential of the generative processes might fall appro-
priately into the category of “the creative light.” Other speculations aside, here at the
very beginning of our study of the other cards I ask that you not lose sight of the
obvious fact that the Fool's genitals are hidden by the Sun.
Atu of Tahuti—the Major Arcana Trumps                                            99


ATUI
THE MAGUS

The Magus of Power

Planetary Trump of Mercury

Oniginal Design: A fair youth with winged helmet
and heels, equipped as a Magician, displays his art.
His attitude suggests the shape of the Swastika or
thunderbolt, the message of God.”

Hebrew Letter: Beth (house).

Tree of Life: Path 12, joining ® Kether—Crown to
® Binah—Understanding.

Colors: Yellow; Purple; Grey; and Indigo, rayed
Violet.

The True Selfts the meaning ofthe True Will:
know Thyselfthrough Thy Way!

Calculate well the Formula ofThy Way!

Createfreely; absorbjoyously; divide intently;
consolidate completely.

Work thou, Omnipotent, Omniscient, Omnipresent,
in andfor Eternity.”


    I have had a wrapper for the catalogue made by the Sun Engraving Co. This
    will be beautifully printed with the Magician reproduced perfectly as a card,
     the right size & engraved on it.””
                                                 —Harris to Crowley May 11, 1941.


Before I discuss the symbolism of the Magus card, I have to set to rest the absurd
rumor that Crowley intended there to be three Magus cards in the Thoth Tarot.
By no stretch of imagination did Crowley intend to create twenty-four trumps or
an eighty-card tarot deck. Any theory or suggestion to the contrary would have
him spinning in his grave (if he had one) and displays a profound ignorance of
Crowley and The Book ofThoth. Crowley approved only one Magus card for inclu-
sion in the Thoth Tarot. It is the image reproduced in The Book of Thoth and is the
100                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


only Magus in the deck currently included in decks published by U.S. Games
Systems, Inc.
      The mystery of the three magi of the Thoth Tarot, is no mystery at all. The
seventy-eight cards of a standard tarot deck are printed on four sheets of twenty
cards per sheet. This provides room for eighty card-size images per print run. Most
publishers fill the extra spaces by printing two instructional or promotional cards.
Rather than doing that, the Swiss publishers, A.G. Mueller, decided to treat
Crowley/Harris aficionados to a little bonus by filling the extra spaces with two
earlier versions of the Magus that Harris completed but Crowley rejected. The two
extra magi are nothing more esoteric than a thoughtful bonus from a generous pub-
lisher. So please, no more talk of the Three Wise Men!
      The Magus is not only the title of the Mercurial trump that, in older decks,
bears the title Magician or Juggler; it is also a title of the second highest level of
spiritual illumination a human soul can attain. Toward the end of his life, Crowley
calculated he reached this initiatory degree on his fortieth birthday, October 12,
1915 E.v. Six years previously, on December 17, 1909, in the North African Sahara
near Biskra, Algeria, he recorded his ceremonially induced vision of the third
Enochian Aethyr” that is the source of much of the imagery found in the Magus
card. He describes it as follows:


      Mercury is pre-eminently the bearer of the Wand: Energy sent forth. This
      card therefore represents the Wisdom, the Will, the Word, the Logos by
      whom the worlds were created. . . . It represents the Will. In brief, he is the
      Son, the manifestation in act of the idea of the Father. He is the male correl-
      ative of the High Priestess.”


The Magus is also the first of the alchemical trumps, and represents the alchemi-
cal element and principal of Mercury. “Mercury,” Crowleys explains, “represents
action in all forms and phases. His is the fluidic basis of all transmission of activ-
ity; and, on the dynamic theory of the Universe, he is himself the substance thereof.”
      The figure of the Magus actually forms the alchemical glyph of Mercury. The
two snakes at his head are the horns and the huge stylized wings at his feet make
the arrowhead. He is projected upon the caduceus of Mercury. Behind the left wing
at his feet, barely visible, is a golden sunburst afÏrming Mercury’s role as herald of
the Sun. Behind the right wing is the Cynolcephalus, the Ape ofThoth. This crea-
ture, who seems to be groping its way up from the lower right-hand corner of the
card, is the personification of an ironic curse that afÒicts Thoth-Mercury and all
who attain the grade of Magus. Because falsehood and misunderstanding are inher-
ent in all speech and writing, it is the cosmic duty of the Ape of Thoth to con-
stantly mock the work of the Magus and distort his words. As Crowley points out,
“Manifestation implies illusion.”*
Atu of Tabuti—the Major Arcana Trumps                                                11


    The traditional weapons of the Magus are the wand, cup, sword, and disk.
“With the Wand,” Crowley observes, “createth He. With the Cup preserveth He.
With the Dagger destroyth He. With the Coin redeemeth He.”TM These are the
weapons the Magus joyfully juggles in midair along with four additional symbols:
the style, papyrus, torch, and winged egg. The wand is the phoenix wand that sym-
bolizes resurrection through the natural generative process; the cup is of Grecian style
with two handles; the sword appears to be a stiletto, the weapon of stealth, deceit,
and vengeance; the disk displays the eightfold star of Mercury; the style and papyrus
are tools and instruments of the scribe.
    The winged egg is an especially important factor in the evolving symbolism
of the Thoth Tarot. In this card, it aptly represents the preexistent zero, which, like
the Magus himself, is the source of all positive manifestation, but it will soon reap-
pear in Atu VI, the Lovers, and other trumps as the symbol known as the Orphic
egg. As the trumps develop, this egg will undergo a most wonderful alchemical
adventure, one that is that is told only in the Thoth Tarot.
    Other elements of the card are at first difÏcult to see. If we look carefully, we
see that the caduceus is much larger than it first appears. Its rod reaches below the
feet of the Magus to the very bottom of the card, where, by virtue of its upward
thrust, it appears to have stretched and finally penetrated the membrane of space.
The wings of the caduceus span the entire width of the top of the card and reach
down behind the neck of the Magus. What appears to be a downward-pointing
arrow in the disk of the caduceus is actually the symbol of the descending dove.
102                                              Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


ATUII
THE HIGH PRIESTESS

                                  The Priestess of the Silver Star

                                  Planetary Trump of the Moon

                                  Original Design: A crowned priestess sits before
                                  the veil of Isis between the pillars of Seth. She is
                                  reading intently in an open book.”

                                  Hebrew Letter: Gimel (camel).

                                  Tree of Life: Path 13, joining @ Kether—Crown
                                  to ® Tiphareth—Beauty.

                                  Colors: Blue; Silver; Cold Pale Blue; and Silver,
                                  rayed Sky Blue.


Purity ts to live only to the Highest; and the
Highest ts All: be thou as Artemis to Pan!

Read thou in The Book ofthe Law, and break
through the veil ofthe Virgin!”


      The Moon, partaking as she does of the highest and the lowest and filling
      all the space between, is the most universal of the Planets.


It may seem curious that the Priestess represents the Moon, but Atu XVIII, the
Moon, represents the zodiac sign of Pisces. We will see what Crowley has to say
about that when we discuss the Moon. Here, let’s be satisfied to know that the
Priestess represents the Moon in her higher aspect—the aspect that joins the human
to the divine. The Moon in Atu XVIII is—well—something else.
      As the only middle-pillar path that spans the Abyss, the position of the High
Priestess on the Tree of Life is unique. She links the ultimate Father of Kether to
the Son of Tiphareth and, in doing so, joins the supernal triad to the rest of the
Tree. “In this card,” Crowley points out, “is the one link between the archetypal
and formative worlds.”” The Abyss she traverses is, quite literally, the desert of the
soul, and like the desert camel, she is the only vehicle capable of crossing that ter-
rible wasteland.
      The principal deities connected with this card are those who, by tradition, rep-
resent the lunar goddess, virgin priestess, huntress, and, most importantly, the powers
Atu of Tabuti—the Mayor Arcana Trumps                                              103


and mysteries of woman as the initiatrix. If you look carefully, you will see that her
bow is actually a three-stringed harp “for she is a huntress, and hunts by enchant-
ment.”
    This card is a textbook display of the graphic principles of synthetic projective
geometry.’ The arms of the Priestess sweep upward, pulling and distorting the
webbed network of space and light, forming the crescent bowl of a magnificent
Moon-colored cup.” The pillars on either side of her are obscured by the diagonal
webbing and somewhat difÏcult to see, but it is important to be conscious of their
presence when meditating on the composition of the card. Harris has brilliantly
executed Crowley’s description as


    the most spiritual form of Isis the Eternal Virgin; the Artemis of the
    Greeks. She is clothed only in the luminous veil of light. It is important for
    high initiation to regard Light not as the perfect manifestation of the
    Eternal Spirit, but rather as the veil which hides that Spirit. It does so all the
    more effectively because of its incomparably dazzling brilliance. Thus she is
    light and the body of light. She is the truth behind the Veil of Light. She is
    the soul of light.”


    The High Priestess is the initiatrix. Initiation means “beginning.”
                                                                    The objects
that appear at the bottom of the card are not lunar symbols per se. The camel is, of
course, indicative of the Hebrew letter Gimel (the Hebrew letter attributed to the
High Priestess), but the other objects, the crystals and seeds, are suggestive of the
hidden and mysterious secrets of the beginning of life.
104                                             Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


ATU III
THE EMPRESS

                         :\     The Daughter of the Mighty Ones

                                Pianetary a of Venus


                                goddess stands upon the moon. She bears a scepter
                                and a shield, whereonis figured a dove as symbol of
                                the male and female forces.“

                                Hebrew Letter: Daleth (door).

                                Tree of Life: Path 14, joining @ Chokmah—
                                Wisdom to ® Binah—Understanding.

                                Colors: Emerald Green; Sky Blue; Early Spring
                                Green; Bright Rose or cerise, rayed pale green.

This ts the Harmony ofthe Universe, that Love
unites the Will to create with the Under-
standing ofthat Creation: understand thou
thine own Will!

Love and let love. Rejoice in every shape of
love, and get thy rapture and thy nourishment
thereof.”


      It is impossible to summarize the meanings of the symbol of the Woman,
      for this very reason, that she continually recurs in infinitely varied form.
      “Many-throned, many-minded, many-wiled, daughter of Zeus.”“


Thank you very much Mr. Crowley!
      At least we can say this—Daleth means door, and woman is the door of heaven
when we are conceived, and the door of life and when we are born. The Empress is the
trump of Venus and, in mythology, Venus, or Aphrodite, certainly had (or seemed to
cause) her share of trouble. Most of the time, however,she was less the guileful instigator
of mischief
         and more the tragic victim ofcircumstances. In either case, almost everybody
was in love with her, and she certainly added a bit of spice to the Olympian soap opera.
      Speaking of spice, the Empress is the second of the alchemical trumps and
represents the element and principal of salt. Like Venus reclining on her love-couch
awaiting the arrival of her next lover, Crowley describes her as “the inactive prin-
    Tabutt—the Major Arcana Trumps
Atu of                                                                                  105

ciple of Nature; Salt is matter which must be energized by Sulfur to maintain the
whirling equilibrium of the Universe.”
     Sulfur, as we will see in the next trump, is represented by the Emperor—who
represents the zodiacal sign of Aries—which is ruled by Mars—who was the lover
of Venus. (It gets scary when this stuff starts to make sense, doesn't it?)
    This card is more than just the full-color foldout of the Scarlet O’Hara of the
gods, however. The path of Daleth is one of only three paths on the Tree of Life
that lies entirely above the Abyss. It connects the second sephira, Chokmah (the
Supernal Father) to the third sephira, Binah (the Supernal Mother). This is the
hallway down which the queen of our Qabalistic fairytale tiptoes to get to the bed-
room of the king. This is the path of the exchange of unimaginable love.
     Harris's Empress is perhaps the most tasteful and soothing card in the pack. The
cool colors immediately lower my blood pressure. At first glance, she appears to be
the goddess of vegetation, which is exactly what she is. Her presence cuts a door-
way through towering plants and grasses. The supports of her throne are formed
from twisted blades of grass, and upon their tops are perched the sparrow and dove,
birds sacred to Venus. Her green skirt is topped with a blouse of passionate red,
ornamented with bees and what appear to be dominos surrounded by spiral rings.
Around her waist is the golden belt of the zodiac.
     Her arms suggest the glyph of salt. She bears the lotus scepter in her left hand, and
her right hand and arm curve delicately as if she were holding an invisible baby to her
breast. This is the magical gesture called Mater Triumphans (Isis suckling the infant
Horus). Perhaps this is just a rehearsal for what is to come. The Empress, if you haven't
noticed, is pregnant (her baby floating blissfully in a salty sea of amniotic fluid).
     In keeping with the motherhood theme, we find, at the lower left of the card, a
white pelican feeding its young from the blood of her own breast. On the lower right
is a shield displaying a white double-headed eagle holding the Moon in its beaks. This
represents the alchemical white tincture whose nature is of the Moon and silver.There
is also a red tincture, and we'll discover it in the next trump, the Emperor.
     All of these symbols sit upon a carpet adorned with fleurs-de-lis and tiny fish
that Crowley suggests “seem to be adoring the Secret Rose which is indicated at
the base of the throne.”“ The secret rose of the Empress is certainly worthy of ado-
ration. Her credentials are impeccable:

     I am Nature and God: I reign, I am, alone.
        None other may abide apart: they perish,
     Drawn into me, into my being grown.
        None other bosom is, to bear, to nourish,
    To be: the heart of all beneath my zone
        Of blue and gold is scarlet-bright to cherish
    My own’ life being, that is, and is not other;
     For I am God and Nature and thy Mother.””
106                                              Understanding Aleister Crowley’ Thoth Tarot


ATU IV
THE EMPEROR

                                  Sun of the Morning, chief among the Mighty

                                Zodiacal Trump of Aries

                                Mars Rules—Sol Exalted

                                Original Design: A flame-clad god bearing equiva-
                                lent symbols. His attitude suggests the symbol of
                                alchemical sulfur, and he is seated upon the cubical
                                stone, whose sides show the green lion and white
                                eagle.”

                                Hebrew Letter: Tzaddi (fish hook).

                                Tree of Life: Path 28, joining @ Netzach—Victory
                                to © Yesod—Foundation.

Colors: Scarlet; Red; Brilliant Flame; Glowing Red.

Use all thine energy to rule thy thought: burn
up thy thought as the Phoenix.”


      I have only just got your letters returned today after travelling from 11 A.M.
      to 7.30 P.M. Sitting in stations & huddling with savage soldiers & children
      in stuffy railway carriages.”
                                                   —Harris to Crowley, May 21, 1941.


In chapter 13, I mentioned a paragraph in The Book ofThoth where Crowley throws
us a real curve regarding the whole “Tzaddi is not the Star” matter. It is one of sev-
eral instances in the book where he seems to contradict himself on this subject.
Before I go on about the Emperor, I will try to overcome my complete exasperation
and calmly address this most frustrating issue. The trouble, it seems, stems from
the direction the light comes from in this card. Let’s start by reviewing what Crowley
tells us in no uncertain terms (and in multiple places) is the situation:


  1. Atu IV is the Emperor.
 2. The zodiac sign assigned to the Emperor is Aries.
 3. The Hebrew letter for the Emperor is 8 Tzaddi (and everything 3 Tzaddi
      represents).
Atu of
    Tabuti—the Major Arcana Trumps                                                 107


 4. On the Tree of Life, the Emperor is found on path 28, which joins the seventh
    sephira, Netzach, to the ninth sephira, Yesod.


     Fine! I'm happy with that. It agrees with Crowley's detailed explanations for the
Tzaddi/He switch. It agrees with his charts and diagrams of the Tree of Life. What
it doesn’t agree with is the last paragraph of his comments on the Emperor on page
78 of The Book ofThoth, where he tells us:


    It is finally to be observed that the white light which descends upon him
    indicates the position of this card in the Tree of Life. His authority is
    derived from Chokmah, the creative Wisdom, the Word, and is exerted
     upon Tiphareth, the organized man.*


    The “white light” in the card issues from the upper right corner and shines
diagonally toward the center of the card. In other words, Crowley is talking as if
the Emperor is positioned on the Tree of Life on the path that runs from the second
sephira, Chokmah, to the sixth sephira, Tiphareth—the path that he tells us in
nearly every other reference should be occupied by the Star. Arghhhh!
    Personally, I think that, in this case, Harris, was operating from the tradi-
tional understanding of the trumps and their placement on the tree, and Crowley's
words carelessly neglected to make that point. Still, I am sure that students of
tarot and Crowley will debate this subject forever. As for me, the only thing I
know for sure is that the author of The Book ofthe Law himself tells us, “All these
old letters of my Book are aright but % is not the Star.” Now, let’s move on—
please!
    Atu IV, the Emperor, represents the sign of Aries, where Mars rules and Sol is
exalted. “The sign,” Crowley points out, “is thus a combination of energy in its most
material form with the idea of authority.” Referring to this card, Crowley even
goes so far as to actually give us a somewhat cynical lesson in civics:


    He is seated upon the throne whose capitals are the heads of the Himalayan
    wild ram, since Aries means a Ram. At his feet, couchant, is the Lamb and
    Flag, to confirm this attribution on the lower plane; for the ram, by nature, is
    a wild and courageous animal, lonely in lonely places, whereas when tamed
    and made to lie down in green pastures, nothing is left but the docile, cow-
    ardly, gregarious and succulent beast. This is the theory of government.*


    The Emperor is the third of the alchemical trumps and represents sulfur. His
arms form the triangle and his legs form the cross of the glyph of sulfur, which
Crowley tells us is “the male fiery energy of the Universe, the Rajas of Hindu phi-
losophy. This is the swift creative energy, the initiative of all Being.”*’
108                                         Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


      Upon his shield is the red eagle that identifies him with what the alchemists
call the red tincture. The red tincture is symbolic of the fiery action and nature of
the Sun and gold, just as the white eagle on the Empress’s shield identifies her with
the white tincture, symbolic of the action and nature of the Moon and silver. The
great alchemical recipe dictates that we must first find the white tincture, then the
red tincture, then unite them to accomplish the great work. This, of course, sug-
gests that the Empress and the Emperor enjoy a much more intimate relationship
than what we expect of governmental ofÏcials. We will see them get very cozy in
Atu XIV, Art.
Atu of
    Tabuth—the Major Arcana Trumps                                                109


ATU V
THE HIEROPHANT

The Magus of the Eternal

Zodiacal Trump of Taurus

Venus Rules—Luna Exalted

Original Design: Between the pillars sits an
ancient. He is crowned, sceptered, and blessing all
in a threefold manner. Four living creatures adore
him, the whole suggesting a pentagram by its
shape.TM

Hebrew Letter: Vau (nail).

Tree of Life: Path 16, joining @ Chokmah—
Wisdom to @ Chesed—Mercy.

Colors: Red; Orange; Deep Indigo; Deep warm Olive; Rich Brown.

Offer thyself Virgin to the Knowledge and
Conversation ofthine Holy Guardian Angel!
All else is a snare.

Be thou athlete with the eight limbs of
                                     Yoga;
for without these thou are not disciplinedfor
anyfight.”


     I should like hours of brain-picking with you. I have 1000 of things I want
     to ask you, I shall never remember whenI see you! Qaballa, Chinese,
     Eddington medley & questions & demands for your sage & onion explana-
     tions pierce the ether all round me.”
                                                —Harris to Crowley, January 28, 1940.


This card is so rich in traditional and Thelemic symbolism that it is difÏcult to
know where to begin. One thing is immediately obvious—this is not your Aeon-
of-Osiris Pope. The whole card is presented as the shrine of the Hierophant of the
Aeon of Horus, and this guy has some sex appeal.
     Instead of the pale, humorless features of a delicate prelate ofÏciating at some
demure worship service, we are thrilled by the bold, confident image of a Babylonian
priest-king—an initiator in every sense of the word. He’s not humbly served by
docile acolytes like the Osirian Hierophant, instead he is actively supported in his
110                                           Understanding Aletster Crowley's Thoth Tarot


work by his sword-bearing Scarlet Woman, the embodiment of heavenly Venus
who rules Taurus. “Let the woman be girt with a sword before me,” The Book of
the Law commands.“ “This woman,” Crowley states, “represents Venus as she now
is in this new aeon; no longer the mere vehicle of her male counterpart, but armed
and militant.”*
      She carries the Moon, which is exalted in the sign ofTaurus. Moreover,we see
evidence of this new initiatory love relationship dramatically highlighted in the
ornate window that illuminates the shrine, which Crowley describes thus:


      This symbolism is further carried out in the oriel where, behind the phallic
      headdress, the rose of five petals is in blossom. The symbolism of the snake
      and dove refers to this verse of The Book ofthe Law—chap. I, verse 57; “there
      are love and love. There is the dove, and there is the serpent.”


      The window is held in place by nine nails, the number nine being symbolic of
the ninth sephira, Yesod, the sphere of the Moon. The Hierophant’s shrine is guarded
(as every good shrine should be) by the four Kerubic beasts. And here I think we
should address what appears at first glance to be a mistake Lady Harris has made
as to the positioning of the four Kerubic beasts.
      The four Kerubic beasts represent the four fixed signs of the zodiac: Leo (the
fixed sign of fire, symbolized by the Lion), Scorpio (the fixed sign of water, sym-
bolized by the eagle), Aquarius (the fixed sign of air, symbolized by a man or angel),
and Taurus (the fixed sign of earth, symbolized by the bull). Tarot decks, reaching
back to the earliest packs, have traditionally displayed the Kerubic beasts in the
corners of various trumps (most often the Wheel of Fortune and the World). The
placement of the four beasts on these old decks is almost universally consistent—
the lion of Leo is in the lower right corner; the eagle of Scorpio is in the upper
right; the man or angel of Aquarius is in the upper left, and the bull ofTaurus is in
the lower left. This is the natural order of the fixed signs as they appear on the zodi-
acal belt, and the logical place to put them.
     In the Thoth Tarot, however, Harris appears to break with this tradition in her
placement of the Kerubic beasts in the Hierophant and the Universe trumps. The
bull and the lion dutifully occupy the traditional corners, but the angel and the eagle
have switched positions. Could it be that she was ignorant of the order of the signs
of the zodiac and that Crowley let her get away with it in two important cards?
Could it be that, in the Aeon of Horus, the signs of the zodiac have been rearranged?
The answer to both of these questions is “no.” In the New Aeon, it’s not the posi-
tion of the zodiac signs, but the symbols of the Kerubs, that have changed.
     In Crowley’s vision of the twenty-third Enochian A'thyr,it is revealed that the
emblem for fixed-air Aquarius is now the eagle, and the emblem for fixed-water
Scorpio is now the angel:
Atu of
    Tabuti—the Mayor Arcana Trumps                                             UI


    The Beast and the Scarlet Woman are attributed to Leo and Scorpio. They
    are the two-in-one Chief OfÏcers of the Temple of the New Eon of Heru-
    Ra-Ha. (Note the Eagle Kerub in the 23 Aire is Aquarius. Scorpio is the
    Woman-Serpent. This is important, for the old attribution is of the Eagle to
    Scorpio“


    The Hierophant’s throne is flanked by elephants. He is seated upon the bull of
Taurus itself. He holds in his right hand a wand surmounted by three rings sym-
bolizing the ascendancy of the Aeon of Horus from the preceding Aeons of Isis
and Osiris. His left hand is open in benediction.
    All this New Aeon imagery is wonderful, but what we should keep foremost
in our minds is the fact that the Hierophant, is the 1 Vau of 71   * YHVH. He is
the six of the divine macrocosmic consciousness to whom we must “nail” the five of
our earthly microcosmic consciousness. He is the Prince Charming in the cosmic
fairytale—our Holy Guardian Angel. The initiatory level characterized by the
knowledge and conversation with the H.G.A is illustrated on this card by the union
of the pentagram and hexagram. Our microcosmic self
                                                  is the dancing child in the
pentagram upon the Hierophant's macrocosmic breast. The hexagram can be seen
enclosing the whole body of the Hierophant.
112                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


ATU VI
THE LOVERS

                               The Children of the Voice

                               The Oracle of the Mighty Gods

                                Zodiacal Trump of Gemini

                               Mercury Rules—Dragon’s Head Exalted

                               Original Design: A prophet, young, and in the sign
                               of Osiris Risen. He is inspired by Apollo to proph-
                               esy concerning things sacred and profane: repre-
                               sented by a boy with his bow and two women, a
                               priestess and an harlot.“

                               Hebrew Letter: Zain (sword).

                               Tree of Life: Path 17, joining @ Binah—
                               Understanding to © Tiphareth—Beauty.

Colors: Orange; Pale Mauve; New Yellow leather; Reddish Grey, inclined to mauve.

The Oracle ofthe Gods 1s the Child-Votce of
Love in thine own Soul! hear thou it!

Heed not the Siren-Voice ofSense, or the
Phantom-Voice ofReason: rest in Simplicity,
and listen to the Silence.”


      Dear Aleister, I have been struggling with a bad cold & the Lovers—the latter
      begins to cheer up. I haven't decided whether I'll come back & brood on the
      Fool or stay here.*”
                                                —Harris to Crowley, date uncertain.


Atu VI, the Lovers, is the fourth of the alchemical trumps. A familiar alchemical
maxim reads solve et coagula, “solution and coagulation.”
                                                      The process of so/ve is rep-
resented in tarot by the Lovers; the process of coagu/a in the Art card. This makes
sense astrologically because, in the zodiac, Gemini (the Lovers) is opposite Sagittarius
(Art). Between these two trumps are other trumps that represent developmental
phases between solve et coagula.
      Solve et coagula is a story of a marriage and pregnancy.
                                                           The main character in this
alchemical
       love story
                is not the bride nor the groom, but the child of their union. In the
Atu of
    Tabutithe Major Arcana Tramps                                                     113


Thoth Tarot, the child is symbolized as the Orphic egg that, as Crowley reminds us,
“represents the essence of all life that comes under the formula of male and female.”
     Like the events surrounding the birth of any child, our alchemical scenario
develops in stages. Atu VI, the Lovers, is the wedding ceremony; Atu XIV, Art, is
the honeymoon; in Atu IX, the Hermit fertilizes the egg; and Atu XIII, Death,
keeps it nice and warm in the last stage before hatching.
     This card is a scene from one of the most famous alchemical texts of all time, The
Chymical Marriage of Christian Rosenkreutz, which Crowley describes as “a master-
piece too lengthy and diffuse to quote in this place. But the essence of the analysis is
the continuous see-saw of contradictory ideas. It is a glyph of duality.” Let’s look
how Lady Harris uses this card to set the scene for the first phase ofthis great romance.
     Starting at the bottom of the card, we find the Orphic egg. It has wings as if
it just flew in from the Magus card. In this beginning phase of the operation, it is
just the latent seed of life. It sits between a white eagle and a red lion symbolic of
the female and male components of our formula—the white and red tinctures of the
Empress and the Emperor. Later, in the Art card, we will see the advanced stage of
the operation—the red lion will turn white and the white eagle will turn red.
     The children attending the bride and groom are none other than Cain and
Abel. Their presence, together with Lilith and Eve in the upper corners, springs
from Crowley's vision of the Second Aethyr of The Vision and The Voice. The bride
is white and wears a silver crown. She holds a golden cup that bears the image of
the descending dove of the Holy Spirit. Her robe is ornamented with bees like the
ones we saw on the blouse of the Empress and the Emperor. The groom is black and
wears a golden crown. He holds the sacred lance, the complementary weapon to
the bride’s cup. His robe is ornamented with snakes like those found on the blouse
of the Emperor.
     The ofÏciating priest is none other than the Hermit of Atu IX. He makes the
magical sign of the Enterer by thrusting his hands forward over the couple. Around
his arms a scroll of the word (the cosmic marriage certificate) is twisted to form
the eternal mobius strip.
     Above all their heads, the blindfolded figure of Cupid or Eros aims his arrow
threateningly in a direction that appears to threaten no one. This is the downward
arrow” spoken of by the angel of the fifth Aethyr of The Viston and The Voice. The
downward arrow is said to be shot by “the topmost point”” of the Yod of YHVH.
As we learned in chapter 9, the Yod has its topmost point in Kether, but it resides
mostly in Chokmah. As we see in the Lovers, Cupid is pointing his arrow directly
from Kether to Chokmah.
     The entire ceremony takes place beneath an arch of steel swords (Zain, the
Hebrew letter attributed to the Lovers, means “Sword.”). We will see how all this
symbolism reverses and blends when we discuss Atu XIV, Art. But first, we have other
trumps to discuss, including those that represent the alchemical phases between
solve et coagula.
114                                            Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


ATU VII
THE CHARIOT

                                The Child of the Powers of the Waters

                                The Lord of the Triumph of Light

                                 Zodiacal Trump of Cancer

                                 Luna Rules—Jupiter Exalted

                                 Original Design: A young and holy king under the
                                 starry canopy. He drives furiously a chariot drawn
                                by two sphinxes. As Levi drew it.”

                                 Hebrew Letter: Cheth (fence).

                                Tree of Life: Path 18, joining ® Binah—
                                Understanding to ®@ Geburah—Severity.

                                 Colors: Amber; Maroon; Rich bright Russet; Dark
                                greenish Brown.

The Issue ofthe Vulture, Two-in-One,
conveyed; this ts the Chartot ofPower.

TRINC: the last oracle!”


      The alteration of Abracadabra (Charioteer) & the Taurus Disk card are com-
      plete. Please forgive this brief statement, it is because I know your are so lucid
      and logical that I can write & tell you I have taken such arbitrary action with-
      out consulting you as you will realize this was a moment to say “Snap!”
                                                  —Harris to Crowley, May 11, 1941.


I hope the reader will forgive me for not spending a great deal of time discussing
the superficial features of this card. They are much like those found in traditional
versions of this trump. The Chariot is drawn by sphinxes representing the elemental
blending of the Kerubic beasts. The starry canopy of the chariot represents the
night sky. The charioteer is in full armor, much like the crab of the zodiac sign of
Cancer, which this card represents. He bears the Holy Grail, in this case a mag-
nificent carved amethyst (sacred to Jupiter,which is exalted in Cancer). The whole
is a rendering of Crowley's vision of the 12th Aethyr in The Vision and The Voice.”
      What I would like to focus upon is a secret of sexual alchemy that Crowley
seemed anxious to convey in his comments on the Chariot in The Book of Thoth.
Atu of Tahuti—the Major Arcana Trumps                                             05


Let's start by reviewing the above quote from Crowley's “General Characters of the
Trumps as They Appear in Use”:


     The Issue of the Vulture, Two-in-One,
     conveyed; this is the Chariot of Power.


     TRINC: the last oracle!”


     This is perhaps the most obscure of all the verses of that work. It talks about
“Two-in-One, conveyed”; The Chariot, of course, conveys the charioteer, who con-
veys the Holy Grail. Therefore, the Holy Grail must represent (or contain) the
Two-in-One. But what is the Holy Grail and what is the Two-in-One?
     Grail mythology tells us that the Holy Grail is the cup from which Christ
drank at the Last Supper, and the same one that Joseph of Aramathea used to catch
the blood and water that spilled from the liplike spear wound in the side of the cru-
cified Christ. Joseph later conveyed the Grail and the spear to a magically con-
structed castle, where their mysterious powers complicated the lives of many
generations of noble knights. In one very real way, the Chariot is the Chapel of the
Holy Grail on wheels.
     AmI trying
              to tell
                   you that the precious bodily fluids of Christ
                                                              are really ingre-
dients of the Two-in-One cocktail of the Holy Grail? In a way, yes. But let’s look
at it another way—let’s look at it as “The Issue of the Vulture.”
     In Egyptian mythology, the vulture was sacred to Maat, the goddess ofjustice
and supreme balance. The vulture was said to conceive without mating. Its child
immaculately conceived in a mysterious internal process that, for other creatures,
requires contributions of from both male and female. The Issue of the Vulture is
therefore the product (or child) of an internal marriage of two perfectly balanced
things, or Two-in-One.
     That's all fine and good, but in real life, vultures mate like every other bird,
and even if they didn’t, how would we humans go about emulating that magical
process. For us, neither the male nor the female is a complete human unit capable
of reproduction. What is absent in the male is present in the female, and vice versa.
Our creation of the Two-in-One that results in the issue of a human baby is the
most natural and (and usually the most pleasant) of all cooperative endeavors. How
are the principles that effect the very human sexual act reflected on a cosmic scale,
however? What would we do with the real Two-in-One even if we knew how to
create it?
     The answer is “TRINC,” an oracular word that comes from the story of
Gargantua and Pantagruel, a mystical satire by Francois Rabelais (1494-1553). In
the story, one of the main characters, Panurge, seeks the answer to the question,
“Should I marry?” He and his companions eventually decide to seek the Oracle of
116                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


the Bottle for the answer. After many adventures, they finally reach the Temple of
the Bottle.” They pass through the door upon which is written En Oino Aletheia
(In wine lies truth), where Bacbuc, the Priestess of the temple, takes them into the
presence of the Holy Bottle. Panurge poses his question, and the Holy Bottle answers
by making a sharp sound like that of cracking glass: “Trinc!” (Drink!). Panurge
interprets this as an afÏrmative answer and an admonition to drink deep from the
wellspring of life and knowledge.
      As you have probably guessed, Panurge’s question “Should | marry?” has deeper
magical implications than simply questioning the wisdom or folly of matrimony.
It should be of particular interest to us because we see so much “marrying” going on
in the trumps of the Thoth Tarot. Recall that our Qabalistic fairytale in chapter 10
is all about marriage; the marriage of the Prince and Princess (the Holy Guardian
Angel and his client), and the marriage of the supernal King and Queen. Two things
becoming one seems to be a formula of supreme spiritual importance in the tarot.
But Trinc (drink) is a curious answer to the question, “Should | marry?” Drink
what?
      The Hebrew letter associated with the Chariot is Cheth, which, when spelled
in full, enumerates to 418, the same number as ABRAHADABRA, the magical
word that expresses the formula of the marriage of the microcosm with the macro-
cosm (or the aspirant to his or her Holy Guardian Angel). This word (with a slight
Lady Harris typo) can be seen embroidered in the canopy of the Chariot. ABRA-
HADABRAis also indicative of the uniting of male and female that we see expressed
in other trumps as alchemical images such as the red/white lion and white/red eagle.
      The Chariot represents the zodiac sign of Cancer,whose symbol is a not-too-
subtle glyph for a particular technique of tantric yoga in which male and female
energies and essences are perfectly prepared, balanced, and exchanged to create the
Two-in-One elixir of life. The elixir is then conveyed in a particular manner to
serve as a eucharistic talisman of unlimited creative potential.
      In the language ofThelemic imagery, the elixar is brewed in the Holy Grail by
Babalon/Nuit in Binah (the Queen of our Qabalistic fairytale), who then offers it
to the Beast/Hadit in Chokmah (the King of our Qabalistic fairytale) and they
both drink (TRINC) and become ecstatically drunken. In doing so, they annihilate
all sense of separateness, and so on. (See chapter 10 if you need to review the whole
story.)
     The path of the Chariot crosses the Abyss and joins the fifth sephira, Geburah,
to the third sephira, Binah. Being so high on the Tree of Life, its mysteries deal
with the most sublime and profound aspects of nature and consciousness. Please
keep this in mind when you are tempted to view this card (and my comments) as
simply an expression of sexual alchemy. As effective as this operation can be, it is only
a reflection of the magick of the gods, a faint echo of the titanic forces, energy, and
love that creates, sustains, and destroys the universe.
Atu of
    Tahuti—the Major Arcana Trumps                                                 17


ATU VIII
ADJUSTMENT

The Daughter of the Lords of Truth

The Ruler of the Balance

Zodiacal Trump of Libra

Venus Rules—Saturn Exalted

Original Design: A conventional figure ofJustice
with scales and balances.”

Hebrew Letter: Lamed (ox goad).

Tree of Life: Path 22, joining @ Geburah—Severity
to ® Tiphareth—Beauty.

Colors: Emerald Green; Blue; Deep Blue-Green;
Pale Green.

Balance against each thought its exact
Opposite! For the Marriage ofthese is the
Annihilation ofIllusion.”


    The Woman Satisfied. From the cloak of the vivid wantonness of her danc-
    ing wings issue her hands; they hold the hilt of the Phallic sword of the
    magician. She holds the blade between her thighs.”
              —Harris to Crowley, between November 3 and December 19, 1939.


    I will do a new Justice, damn her. Do you think there was ever “a woman sat-
    isfied”? With what a smirk she would greet the dawn.”
                                            —Harris to Crowley, December 19, 1939.


    My experience of satisfied women is that they do greet the dawn with a
    smirk; if not the dawn, any time up to five o'clock in the afternoon, and only
    when it wears off does one have to start all over again. ...
         These notes on Justice, or as we have preferred to call her
    “Adjustment.”. .. I suppose I was in a very bad temper when I made my
    criticism, but I do feel strongly that the plumes of Maat are too insignifi-
    cant, and the Dove and Raven look simply stuck on; nor do I think that the
    tessellated pavement is quite right. The general criticism is that the card is a
    little too cold; Libra is the sign of autumn, season of mists and mellow fruit-
118                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


      fulness, close-bosomed friend of the maturing sun. In your card you have got
      the idea of balance static, whereas it ought to be dynamic. Nature is not the
      grocer weighing out a pound of sugar; it is the compensation of complicated
      rhythms. I should like you to feel that every adjustment was a grande pas-
      sion; compensation should be a festival, not a clerk smugly pleased that his
      accounts are correct. It seems to me that this doctrine is very important as a
      commentary on the text “Existence is pure joy”, and I feel sure that the con-
      nection of Venus and Saturn with the sign is significant in this respect. The
      compensation is surely the awakening of the Eld of the All-Father, the con-
      stant reproduction of the original purity from the last stage of illusion.
      (Compare what I said above about the number Ten). . .
          To return to “Adjustment”; those birds bother me very much. I don't
      think they belong. | think they come from Noah’s Ark. It would be better to
      simplify this card by leaving them out altogether. I feel sure that when you
      get the Venus and Saturn dancing motive firmly in your mind, you will pro-
      duce a lady whom you will like better."
                                           —Crowley to Harris, December 19, 1939


      The Adjustment is being queer with me. She has, after all, insisted on being
      Beardsley!” Also Harlequin comes in & out of it so I must have to submit.
      But why Harlequin? Is there any connection? Also she won't sit down but
      stands on her toes just balanced. The design-result is good. That blue is
      cobalt I take it. The instruction says Blue-Blue Green. Pale green Emerald.
      That Emerald is a vile pigment in poster paints.”
                                                 —Harris to Crowley, July 12, 1940.


Judging from what is written in the above excerpts from the Crowley-Harris cor-
respondence, it is clear that the early drafts of Adjustment bore little resemblance
to the finished product. Crowley obviously had a clear idea what was needed, and
the fact that he wrote so passionately on the matter underscores the importance he
ascribed to this trump. His words are aimed, however, not only at Frieda Harris,
the artist, but at Soror Tzaba, the magical student. He not only wanted the
Adjustment card to turn out the way he wanted, he wanted Harris to appreciate its
spiritual importance and achieve an epiphany of understanding. It appears to me that
they both were successful.
      The goddess of Adjustment is in perfect balance, left to right and top to bottom.
Amid spheres of light and darkness, she stands on tiptoe at the very point of her
sword. An enormous set of balances suspends from the perfect point of her crown
(the ostrich plumes of Maat, the Egyptian goddess of justice). The left scale pan
holds the alpha, and the right the omega. The lines from her toes to the scale pans
to the tip of her crown create a lozenge, a type of vesicaTM (by which students of
Atu of Tahuti—the Major Arcana Trumps                                       ug


mystic geometry measure the immeasurable), which stretches the fabric of space
to reveal the goddess. Crowley calls Adjustment “the feminine complement of the
Fool.”*
    The combined Hebrew letters these cards represent, Aleph and Lamed, spell
AL and enumerate to 31. AL is the root of the Hebrew word for “God”; LA is the
Hebrew word for “not.” In the Western Zen ofThelema, “God-Not-God” is a very
important concept.
120                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


ATU IX
THE HERMIT

                               The Prophet of the Eternal

                               The Magus of the Voice of Power

                                Zodiacal Trump of Virgo

                               Mercury Rules—Mercury Exalted

                                Original Design: Wrapped in a cloak and cowl, an
                                ancient walketh, bearing a lamp and staff. Before
                                him goeth upright the Royal Ureus Serpent.*

                                Hebrew Letter: Yod (hand).

                               Tree of Life: Path 20, joining @ Chesed—Mercy to
                               ® Tiphareth—Beauty.

                                Colors: Green (yellowish); Slate Grey; Green Grey;
                                Plum color.

Wander alone; bearing the Light and
thy Staff! And be the Light so bright
that no man seeth thee!

Be not moved by aught without or within:
keep Silence in all ways”


      Why don’t you like my egg question? Is it because you don't know the
      answer?*
                                         —Harris to Crowley, November 30, 1939.


By now, you are probably tired of hearing me talk about the special virtues inher-
ent in the element earth. You probably think you've heard enough about how humble
earth is uniquely connected to spirit, and how it helps regenerate the highest high
because of the simple fact that it is the lowest low (see chapter 11).
     Well, get ready to hear some more, because we are not through yet. As a matter
of fact, in the pages that follow, you are going to get some pretty big doses of this
doctrinal medicine that Crowley calls the “climax of the Descent into Matter.”®
Why is it so important for you to keep taking this medicine? First of all, because it
will help you understand the living nature of tarot. More important, however,
because you are the grand climax of the descent into matter.
Atu of
    Tahuti—the Major Arcana Trumps                                                    121


     I have tried to organize the material of this book so that by the time you read
about the last card of the tarot, the Ten of Disks, you will be armed with enough occult
knowledge to comprehend the great magick that takes place there. It is a process that
Crowley calls, “the mode of fulfillment of the Great Work.”
     I’m sure you wouldn't do this, but if you were to turn to the back of the book
and read what I have written about the Ten of Disks, you would learn (albeit pre-
maturely) that the three key cosmic players that are responsible for creating that
“mode of fulfillment of the Great Work” are Earth, Mercury, and the Sun. That
shouldn't surprise you really. After all, Earth is that special lowest-of-the-low
element you're getting so tired of hearing about; tarot is the province of
Thoth/Mercury; and the Sun is the secret seed of universal life that we knew was
going be so important since we first saw it radiating from in front of the Fool’s
groin. Earth, Mercury, and the Sun have their first important strategy meeting in
Atu IX, the Hermit.
    Just look at how Earth, Mercury, and the Sun come together in the Hermit. He
represents the zodiac sign of Virgo. Virgo is the mutable sign of Earth. Virgo is
ruled by Mercury, and Mercury is exalted in Virgo. The Hermit carries the lamp of
the Sun, with which he gives his light to the world. It’s a simple as that.
    We've met the Hermit once before as the hooded figure that ofÏciates at the
royal wedding in Atu VI, the Lovers, and, while he is sexually ambivalent, he is
indeed a “he” and an important expression of male creative energy. The Hebrew
letter sacred to Virgo and the Hermit is * Yod, the tenth letter, and the first and
supreme letter in     11 * YHVH. In a very real way, the tiny flame of Yod is the
fundamental Hebrew letter. All the other letters are created from this basic form.
As the hidden seed of the Hebrew alphabet, Yod also symbolizes the mystery of
sperm, the hidden seed, and a central secret of fertilization. (See how the Hermit
stares at the Orphic egg? If I were that egg, I'd be nervous!) Crowley writes, “In
this Trump is shewn the entire mystery of Life in its most secret workings.””
    While, in my opinion, this remains true, we have to remember that Crowley died
before the discovery of DNA, and so his understanding of biology was naturally
incomplete and based upon obsolete doctrines and theories. There is, however, an
abundance of images in this card to handily accommodate more recent scientific
discoveries, and it doesn’t take a rocket scientist to tell us this card is loaded. Let’s
see how Harris graphically handles all of this.
     First of all, the figure of the Hermit himself is one big stylized Yod. He sports
the ibis head of Thoth/Mercury. The only other visible part is his hand. (Yod in
Hebrew) He stands in the fertile field of wheat. The heavy-headed shafts sugges-
tive of sperm. He carries the lamp of the Sun. He is dogged by Cerberus, the three-
headed guardian of the gates of the underworld, whom Hermes/Mercury tamed
with honey cakes during his mission to rescue Persephone from Hades.
122                                        Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


      Perhaps the most intriguing image on the card is what appears to be a wrig-
gling sperm cell in the lower left corner. Actually, it is the Homunculus image,
first drawn in 1694 by Nicholas Hartsoecker, a noted advocate of the long-
discredited theory of reproduction called the principal of spermist preformation.”
If you look closely at the head of the Homunculus, you will see a large-~headed
baby curled in the fetal position. While this concept is based upon biologically
inaccurate science, it expresses the more universal and magically correct doctrine
of correspondence: As above, so below.
     You may find it rewarding to study the Hermit trump in conjunction with Atu
XV, the Devil.
Atu of
    Tahuti—the Major Arcana Trumps                                                  123


ATU X
FORTUNE

The Lord of the Forces of Life

Planetary Trump ofJupiter

Original Design: A wheel of six shafts, whereon
revolve the Triad of Hermanubis, Sphinx, and
Typhon (846 alchemical mercury, sulfur, and
salt, or the three gunas sattva, rajas, and tamas).”

Hebrew Letter: Kaph (palm of hand).

Tree of Life: Path 21, joining ® Chesed—Mercy to
@ Netzach—Victory.

Colors: Violet; Blue; Rich Purple; Bright Blue,
rayed yellow.

Follow thy Fortune, careless where it lead thee!
The axle moveth not: attain thou thatTM


    If you are expecting the Tarot to be a means of getting money, or my posi-
    tion as useful for pushing it—I am sorry
                                           I am not the right vehicle for such
     an enterprise as I intend to remain anonymous when the cards are shown as
    I dislike notoriety. Your books are wonderful but you must not expect the
    reading or money making world to buy them as they don’t want to think.”
                                                   —Harris to Crowley, May 10, 1939.


For centuries, the Wheel of Fortune has been interpreted as the card of good luck.
That is only partially true. It is also the card of bad luck; and the card of luck get-
ting better; and the card of luck getting worse. Whatever kind of luck we are talk-
ing about, one thing’s a sure bet. It’s going to change. “This card,” Crowley insists,
“thus represents the Universe in its aspect as a continual change of state.”TM
    Change is stability, and with stability comes order, and the god that brings
order to so-called creation is the Demiurge,” the highest god below the Abyss—the
“creator” god who thinks it is the supreme deity, because it is unaware of the cir-
cumstances of its own creation. Allow me to put this concept in terms of Roman
mythology.
    Saturn and his wife, Cybele, were Titans, aspects of the old chaotic forces that
preceeded the so-called “ordered universe.” Saturn was warned in prophesy that one
of his own offspring would one day dethrone him, so each time Cybele gave birth,
124                                             Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


Saturn swallowed the child. As long as he kept doing this, the universe remained in
pure potentiality, and “creation” (as we know it) was put on hold. Cybele eventually
got tired of all this baby eating and, when she gave birth to her sixth child, Jupiter,
she tricked Saturn by giving him a stone to swallow. She then secretly removed the
child from Saturn's presence and brought him to Earth to be raised. Saturn eventu-
ally got indigestion and threw up the rock and the five other divine children. As
prophesied, Jupiter dethroned Saturn, organized his brothers and sisters, brought
order to the cosmos, and, from our mortal point of view, created the universe.
      Why
        am I telling you this story here? Because, in Qabalistic
                                                         terms, when Cybele
removed baby Jupiter from Saturn's presence, she disturbed the status quo of pre-
creation chaos and, in doing so, created the three landmark environments of the
Tree of Life: the supernal triad (the pre-creational state), the Abyss (that separates
the supernal triad from creation), and the seven sephiroth below the Abyss.
      Above the Abyss, all opposites are reconciled. There is no concept of change
or luck or anything else we can comprehend. It is only below the Abyss that the
lumbering apparatus of forces and principals that appear to drive the universe is set
in motion. The fundamental flywheel that keeps this great machine churning out
everything we interpret as existence is a very efÏcient little perpetual-motion device
located in the highest sephira below the Abyss, Chesed—the sphere of Jupiter,
where the three gunas revolve. The blueprint for this three-stroke engine is Atu X,
Fortune.
      If you look very carefully at Lady Harris's interpretation, you will see a large tri-
angle, its apex pointing upward, just behind the wheel. The base of the triangle is
somewhat obscured by several of the ten plumes of energy that spray from the ends
of each spoke of the wheel like the fiery sparks that propel a fireworks pinwheel. The
hub of the wheel is positioned within the triangle. This two-part symbol is called
Centrum In Centri Trigono® and is the symbolic key to the secret of Jupiter. It is
also the key to transcending the secret ofJupiter.
      Every year, various O.T.O.bodies throughout the world present public per-
formances of Crowley's seven planetary rituals, The Rites ofEleusts. lf you ever get
a chance to attend these lively audience-participation plays, I strongly urge that
you do so. At the beginning of the Rite ofJupiter, the stage is set to represent Atu
X, Fortune. Dominating the scene is a large wheel. At the hub of the wheel sits
Centrum In Centri Trigono. Three actors portraying Hermanubis, Typhon, and the
Sphinx are positioned upon the rim of the wheel. They spend the better half
                                                                          of Act
I bickering with each other while they circle the rim of the wheel in a fruitless
attempt to reach the motionless center.
      Although Hermanubis, Typhon, and the Sphinx are not openly identified as the
alchemical elements (mercury, salt, and sulfur), or as the tarot trumps (the Magus,
the Empress, and the Emperor), or as the gunas (sattvas, tamas, and rajas), that is
exactly what they are, and they are locked in a perpetual game of one-ups-manship
Atu of
    Tabuti—the Major Arcana Tramps                                        135


    C.1.C.T. addresses Typhon as “Feeling,” Hermanubus as “Thought,” and the
Sphinx as “Ecstasy.” In a moment of fatherly magnanimity, he shares with them
the Zen-like secret ofJupiter:

    Feeling, and thought, and ecstasy
    Are but the cerements of Me.
    Thrown off like planets from the Sun
    Ye are but satellites of the One.
    But should your revolution stop
    Ye would inevitably drop
    Headlong within the central Soul,
    And all the parts become the Whole.
    Sloth and activity and peace,
    When will ye learn that ye must cease?”
126                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


                               The Daughter of the Flaming Sword

                               Zodiacal Trump of Leo

                               Sol Rules—Uranus Exalted

                               Original Design: A smiling woman holds the open
                               jaws of a fierce and powerful lion.'’”

                               Hebrew Letter: Teth (serpent).

                               Tree of Life: Path 19, joining @ Chesed—Mercy to
                               @ Geburah—Severity.

                               Colors: Yellow (greenish); Deep Purple; Grey;
                               Reddish Amber.


Mitigate Energy with Love; but let Love devour
all things.
Worship the name                          ;
foursquare, mystic, wonderful, and the name of
Hs House 418."

(Crowley note): This Name to be communicated to those worthy of that Initiation.


      Well you must understand the feeling of it. Now how do you feel if you see
      nice chocolates & there, you get them & how good they taste. That is a pic-
      ture of how you feel about those chocolates.'”
                                              —Harris to Crowley, March 25, 1942.


That is how at an exhibition of her paintings Lady Harris explained the Lust card
to an inquisitive child. The principal deities connected with this card are those who,
by tradition, are associated with the power of the female to arouse, harness, and
direct the animal nature: Demeter and Astarte bore by lions; Venus repressing the
Volcanic fire; Babylon the Great and the Beast of The Book of the Revelation.
      Lust is perhaps the most beautiful and provocative of the entire deck and one
of the trumps that exemplifies Crowley’s visionary and initiatory experiences chron-
icled in The Vision and The Voice, particularly his vision of the 12th Aethyr.
      While very tame by modern standards, the naked image of the Babylon,'® the
Scarlet Woman, elevating the Holy Grail and straddling a fantastic and terrible
Atu of
    Tabuti—the Major Arcana Trumps                                                  127


seven-headedTM Beast is still too daring for many twenty-first-century sensitivities.
In state and federal prisons throughout the United States, the Thoth Tarot (because
of the Lust card) is considered pornographic contraband and its possession by
inmates is forbidden. Even seasoned taroists who should know better, point to the
Lust card as another example of Crowley polluting the tarot with his dirty mind.
    Nothing could be further from the truth. The imagery is illustrative of the
most sublime and universal spiritual arcanum—that of the ecstatic dissolution of all
we are (referred to in Thelemic texts as the “blood of the Saints”) into the univer-
sal self of godhead (symbolized as a great “whore” and the Holy Grail she embod-
ies). This is not—I repeat—this is not a statement concerning morality or immorality!
It is perhaps the most perfect example of Crowley’s use of an old Aeon “blaspheme”
to illustrate a more accurate view of new Aeon spiritual perception.
    For two thousand years, the symbol ofthe virgin has been the symbol ofthe pure
vessel and the supreme female spiritual ideal in Western civilization. It’s a won-
derful symbol, as far as it goes, that deals with the great mystery of the descent of
divine spirit into matter. The mystery of Babylon concerns an entirely different
concept—that of the reabsorption of all evolving life and consciousness into Binah,
the great supernal female. In this mystery, the symbol of the whore (who is indis-
criminately receptive to all) becomes the supreme and holy image. Listen to how
Crowley’s angel of the 12th Aethyr describes her:


    This is the Mystery of Babylon, the Mother of abominations, and this is the
    mystery of her adulteries, for she hath yielded up herself to everything that
    liveth, and hath become a partaker in its mystery. And because she hath made
    herself the servant of each, therefore she is become the mistress of all.’


    The supreme spiritual message of this card may be summed up something like
this: Eventually each of us will come to a level of consciousness so profoundly high
that the only level higher is the universal consciousness of deity itself. Our disso-
lution into the infinite is the ultimate sacrifice, the ultimate marriage. Deity lusts
for that moment when all her children will return to her. Someday, each one of us
will also lust for that moment.
128                                              Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


ATU XII
THE HANGED MAN

                                The Spirit of the Mighty Waters

                                 Elemental Trump of Water

                                 Original Design: The figure of a hanged or cruci-
                                fied man. Froma gallows shaped like the letter 7
                                 (Daleth) hangs by one foot a young fair man. His
                                other leg forms a cross with the suspending one.
                                 His arms, clasped behind his head, form and
                                upright triangle, and this radiates light. His mouth
                                is resolutely closed.’

                                 Hebrew Letter: Mem (water).

                                Tree of Life: Path 23, joining © Geburah—Severity
                                to @ Hod—Splendor.

Colors: Deep Blue; Sea-green; Deep Olive Green; White, flecked Purple.

Let not the water whereon thoujourneyest wet
thee! And, being come to shore, plant thou the
Vine and rejowce without shame.'”


      We will finish like Alice through the Looking Glass by having the whole
      pack on our heads. Goodnight.
                                                        —Harris to Crowley, Fall, 1939.


      I have long foreseen the “Alice in Wonderland” conclusion of our labours,
      but that if you remember was the signal for the awakening to the beauty of
      life.'”
                                           —Crowley to Harris, December 19, 1939.


To paraphrase
      what I said conceming the Hierophant,
                                       Atu XII is not your Aeon of Osiris
Hanged Man. Neither is it the Hanged Man of the Aeon of Isis. Crowley makes a
tremendous attempt to explain why this is so in The Book ofThoth. Please don't mis-
understand me. I mean no disrespect when I use the words “attempt to explain,” and
I am certainly not suggesting that I could explain these things any better. It is just very
clear to me that, before Crowley sat down to write his commentary on this card, he
must have swallowed a handful of I-think-I-will-try-to-explain-the-innermost-secret-
of-life-and-all-the-mysteries-of-High Magick-and-the-Universe-in-general pills.
Atu of
    Tahuti—the Mayor Arcana Trumps                                                  129


     He gives it a pretty good try. He even offers us several very revealing para-
graphs concerning the most profound secrets of sexual alchemy and magick that, for
those who are interested in those subjects, will certainly be worth further study and
meditation (see chapter 11). Perhaps the reason he apparently goes so far afield in
his comments is that he believed that the Hanged Man, as historically and tradi-
tionally understood, is now obsolete in a New Aeon tarot deck. In fact, he tells us
to regard it as an evil legacy from the old Aeon and goes on to compare it rather
unflatteringly with the appendix in the human body:


    This card is beautiful in a strange, immemorial, moribund manner. It is the
     card of the Dying God; its importance in the present pack is merely that of
     the Cenotaph.'”


    A cenotaph is a tomb or a monument erected to honor a person whose actual
body is buried somewhere else. Be that as it may, he goes on to give us a very good
Aeon-of-Horus interpretation of the Hanged Man, the highlights of which (even
though I don't have any ITIWTTETISOLAATMOHMATHUIG pills) I will try
to summarize.
     First, observe that the arms and legs of our crucified hero make the figure of
a cross surmountinga triangle. Crowley tells us that this symbolizes “the descent of
the light into the darkness in order to redeem it.”" It is nothing less than the cosmic
sacrifice that creates, sustains, and destroys the universe. Our perception of how we
are part of this grand sacrifice has evolved over the aeons. The sacrifice meant one
thing to our ancestors in the Aeon of Isis, another thing in the Aeon of Osiris, and
now, as we shall see, means something altogether different in the present Aeon of
Horus. (If, for some reason, you have not read chapter 6, I suggest that you do so
before reading on.)
    Crowley identifies the Aeon of Isis with the element water. This was an age
when it was universally perceived that human life came from woman alone. The
sacrifice was made by the woman on the altar of her own body, and the Hanged
Man was the unborn baby who floated upside down in the water of the womb just
prior to birth.
    The Aeon of Osiris is identified with the element air, which is sympathetic to
both water and fire. Therefore, in the Aeon of Osiris, the sacrifice was one of com-
promise. This was the age of the dying god, when a guy just couldn't be a real savior
unless he first came out of the water (baptized, etc.) and then compromised his
own body by allowing himself to be tortured, murdered, then hung
                                                             or nailed to
                                                                        a tree
to redeem the lives of his people. A couple of thousand years ago, this selfless ges-
ture was a big step forward in spiritual politeness. As a matter of fact, for the Aeon
of Osiris, it became the supreme formula of adeptship expressed by      IN RI/1AO
(see chapter 8).
130                                         Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


      The Aeon of Horus is identified with the element fire (represented by the
Hebrew mother letter & Shin and the Aeon trump). In the Aeon of Horus, the
water of the Hanged Man and the fire of the Aeon don't get along at all. In this
Aeon, Crowley warns, “The whole idea of sacrifice is a misconception of nature
...”!2 The gesture of sacrificial suicide is not only obsolete, it is downright coun-
terproductive:


      But now, under a Fiery lord of the Aeon, the watery element, so far as water
      is below the Abyss, is definitely hostile, unless the opposition is the right
      opposition implied in marriage.’


    The marriage he is talking about is the “annihilation ofthe self
                                                                   in the Beloved.”
This is symbolized in the card by the ankh (the union of the Rose and Cross, of
male and female.) It is the devotional ecstasy that dissolves all sense of separate-
ness that I wrote about in chapter 11. This “marriage,” as mystics and saints of every
age and culture have tried to tell us, is the supreme sacrifice.
     The Hanged Man of the Thoth Tarot still symbolizes the descent of the light
into the darkness in order to redeem it, but the word “redeem” no longer implies
an existing debt that needs to be paid. Instead, redemption in the Aeon of Horus
is the noble duty of the enlightened to bring enlightenment to the unenlightened.
      Please note how Lady Harris ingeniously uses projective geometry to link this
card with other water-related cards. Try placing the Hanged Man top-to-top with
the High Priestess and the Queen of Cups. Other items of interest include her styl-
ized Enochian tablets in the background, and her use of the color green to inject a
Venusian influence.
Atu of
    Tabuti—the Major Arcana Trumps                                                 131


ATU XIll
DEATH

The Child of the Great Transformers

The Lord of the Gate of Death

Zodiacal Trump of Scorpio

Mars Rules—Pluto Exalted

Original Design: A skeleton with a scythe mowing
men. The scythe handle is a Tau."

Hebrew Letter: Nun (fish).

Tree of Life: Path 24, joining ® Tiphareth—Beauty
to @ Netzach—Victory.

Colors: Green Blue; Dull Brown; Very dark Brown;
Livid Indigo Brown.

The Universe is Change; every Change 1s the
effect ofan Act ofLove; all Acts ofLove contain
PureJoy. Die daily!

Death ts the apex ofone curve ofthe snake Life:
behold all opposites as necessary complements,
and rejowe.'”


     I will try out what you suggest. “More work for the undertaker” says I.'"”
                                                   —Harris to Crowley, Fall, 1939.


In Hamlet, Marcellus tells Horatio, “Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.”
He might just as easily have said, “Something smells fishy.” Both statements are
uncannily appropriate when the subject is the Death card. The Hebrew letter
assigned to Death is Nun, which means “fish.” The fish is one of the most revered
symbols of tenacious life and resurrection in the traditions of
                                                              Western civilization.
Dead fish decay quickly and smell terrible (in Denmark and everywhere else!), but
the secret of life is in that stinky stuff.
     It is very difÏcult to discuss the Death card without also discussing the next
trump, Art. From an alchemical point of view, Death really should come after Art
for the not-so-simple reason that Art foreshadows the final stage of the great work.
Death is the final stage itself. Even though it is not pictured in the Death card, our
132                                             Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


snake-wrapped Orphic egg—the latent seed of life that we first saw in the Magus
card, whose elements were married in the Lovers, and which then was fertilized by
the Hermit—is now entering the last stage of development before hatching into
new life.
      In a way, the Art card actually incorporates the Death card in its imagery. If you
turn forward a few pages and look at the illustration of the Art card, you will see an
androgyne figure pouring fire and water upon the heads of a lion and an eagle and
then into a great cauldron. If you look closely at the cauldron, you will see the image
of a raven perched upon a human skull. Lady Harris may as well have painted a
sign on the cauldron that reads, “This is cauldron is the Death card.”
      The emblem of the raven and skull is called the caput mortuum, and indicates
the alchemical process that takes place inside the cauldron. That process is putre-
faction, and putrefaction is what the Death card is all about:


      In alchemy, this card explains the idea of putrefaction, the technical name
      given by its adepts to the series of chemical changes which develops the final
      form of life from the original latent seed in the Orphic egg."


      Things may be rotten in Denmark, but in the alchemy of tarot, the stink of
putrefaction is the sweet smell of impending success. It is a threefold process that
gently warms the Orphic egg during its last most sensitive phase before birth. If
we were to look into the cauldron, we would see that process bubbling away as a
scorpion, a serpent, and an eagle, the three images and aspects of Scorpio.
    The scorpion is found in the lower right corner of the Death card, and sym-
bolizes, according to Crowley, the lowest aspect of Scorpio.

      The lowest is symbolized by the Scorpion, which was supposed by early
      observers of Nature to commit suicide when finding itself ringed with fire,
      or otherwise in a desperate situation. This represents putrefaction in its
      lowest form. The strain of environment has become intolerable, and the
      attacked element willingly subjects itself to change."”


      The middle aspect of Scorpio, Crowley explains, is represented as a serpent,
which can be seen in the lower left corner:


      The serpent is sacred, Lord of Life and Death, and its method of progres-
      sion suggests the rhythmical undulation of those twin phases of life which
      we call respectively life and death.'’”


      The third symbol of Scorpio is the eagle that we see in the upper left corner of
the card. The eagle, as described by Crowley, is a real gas!
Atu of Tabuti—the Major Arcana Trumps                                               133


    The highest aspect of the card is the Eagle, which represents exaltation
    above solid matter. It was understood by the early chemists that, in certain
    experiments, the purest (i.e., most tenuous) elements present were given off
    as gas or vapour.'”


    If all three of these aspects of putrefaction are in turn allowed to unfold per-
fectly, they generate the gentle heat necessary to incubate the Orphic egg in its final
stage of development.
    The Death card of the Thoth Tarot is the antithesis of those found in traditional
packs. This is no stiff grim reaper standing on the Earth, indiscriminately mowing
down people, young and old, humble and highborn. This Death is vivacious and
flexible. He wears the crown of Osiris and dances madly on the bottom of the sea.
Instead of mowing down the living, he uses his scythe to stir up bubbles of new
lives from the out of the seemingly dead and decaying sediment. “So also,” Crowley
observes, “the formula of continued life is death, or putrefaction.””* Death is, thus,
in truth, “the original secret male creative God.”
134                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


ATU XIV


                                The Daughter of the Reconcilers,
                                the Bringer forth of Life

                                Zodiacal Trump of Sagittarius

                                Jupiter Rules—Dragon’s Tale Exalted

                                Original Design: The figure of Diana huntress. A
                                winged and crowned goddess, with flashing golden
                                belt, stands, and pours from her right hand the
                                flame of a torch upon an eagle, while from her left
                                hand she pours water from an urn upon a lion.
                                Between her feet a Moon-shaped cauldron of silver
                                smokes with perfume.”

                                Hebrew Letter: Samekh (serpent).

Tree of Life: Path 25, joining ® Tiphareth—Beauty to ® Yesod—Foundation.

Colors: Blue; Black; Blue-black; Cold dark Grey nearing black.

Pour thine allfreelyfrom the Vase in thy
right hand, and lose no drop! Hath not thy left
hand a vase?

Transmute all wholly into the Image ofthy
Will, bringing each to its token of
Perfection!

Dissolve the Pearl in the Wine-cup: drink, and
make manifest the Virtue ofthat Pearl!”


      Temperance is a kettle of fish.'*
                                           —Harris to Crowley, date uncertain, 1939.


Sagittarius means “the archer”; the traditional image of this card is that of Diana the
Huntress. We see echoes of this original theme in the two bows near the top of the
card and the tiny upward-pointing arrow rising in the rainbow fumes of the caul-
dron. The celebrated Diana of Ephesis is portrayed in statuary as having many
breasts. The deeply plunging neckline on the dress of the Art card’s main figure
Atu of Tabuti—the Major Arcana Trumps                                                135


reveals three columns of neatly stacked breasts reminiscent of the famous Ephesian
statue of Diana.
     With these exceptions, the Sagittarian imagery is almost completely smothered
in alchemical symbolism. After all, as Crowley points out, “This card represents
the Consummation of the Royal Marriage which took place in Atu VI” and Art
is the “coagula” to the Lovers “so/ve.” Also, in this card, the white tincture of the
Empress is united with the red tincture of the Emperor.
    We've already learned, in chapter 8, that the Magus, the Empress, and the
Emperor represent the alchemical elements of mercury, salt, and sulfur. We also
learned that these three principals, when combined and perfectly balanced, create
the universal solvent, vitriol. What we haven't as yet learned is what to do with our
vitriol. Just what are we supposed to dissolve with it? I guess the simplest answer
would be to say that vitriol dissolves old life in order to create new life. Let's look
at the Art card and see where that new life is going to come from.
    First of all, notice that the figures in the forefront of the card are positioned
before a huge golden egg. This is, of course, the Orphic egg, and everything we see
happening in front of the egg is actually the secret work that is being done inside.
Shimmering around the egg, as if to advertise the radiant life within, is a golden
aura displaying in beautiful penmanship the alchemical motto: VISITA INTERI-
ORA TERRAE RECTIFICANDO INVENIES OCCULTUM LAPIDEM—‘Visit
the interior parts of the earth: by rectification thou shalt find the hidden stone.”
    Cooking up the potion that is making that visit possible is a strange and won-
derful being whom we first met as two characters, the bride and groom, in Atu VI,
the Lovers. The black King and white Queen have now merged and becomea single
character with two heads. The white bride now has black hair and wears the golden
crown,
  the black groom now has golden hair
                                  and wears the silver crown. Her/his arms
are exposed to reveal that the body is also countercharged.
    His/her dress is decorated with both bees and serpents, and she/he stands
behind a cauldron into which he/she pours water from a silver chalice from his/her
left hand, and fire from her/his right hand. Flanking the cauldron (as they flanked
the Orphic egg in the Lovers) stand the lion and the eagle. They have also made a
dramatic change. The lion has turned white and the eagle is now red, having trans-
muted to their opposite characteristic by the dual baptism of fire and water (the
union of the white and red tinctures).
    At the very bottom of the card, the fire and the water exist together in har-
mony. Crowley writes,


    But this is only crude symbol of the spiritual idea, which is the satisfaction
    of the desire of the incomplete element of one kind to satisfy its formula by
    assimilation of its equal and opposite.”
136                                        Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


     I understand that, for many readers of this book, these forays into the strange
and abstruse world of alchemy may seem like unwelcome detours from the subject
of tarot. They are, however, Crowley's forays, and they are an important aspect of
the Thoth Tarot that set it apart from the more traditional decks. The alchemical
aspects of the Thoth Tarot are implicit in the fundamental structure of the tarot
itself. Indeed, until I became familiar with the alchemical processes Crowley intro-
duces in The Book of Thoth, | really had no idea why the original title of the
Temperance/Art card was “The Daughter of the Reconcilers, the Bringer forth of
Life.”
Atu of
    Tabuti—the Major Arcana Trumps                                                   137


ATU XV
THE DEVIL

The Lord of the Gates of Matter

The Child of the Forces ofTime

Zodiacal Trump of Capricorn

Saturn Rules—Mars Exalted

Original Design: The figure of Pan or Priapus.
Levi’s Baphomet is sound commentary on this
Mystery, but should not be found in the text.”

Hebrew Letter: Ayin (eye).

Tree of Life: Path 26, joining ® Tiphareth—Beauty
to © Hod—Splendor.

Colors: Indigo; Black; Blue-black; Cold dark Grey,
nearing black.

With thy right Eye create allfor thyself, and
With the left accept all that be created
Otherwise!"


        The Devil does not exist. It is a false name invented by the Black Brothers to
        imply a Unity in their ignorant muddle of dispersions. A devil who had unity
        would be a god."!


The Devil may not exist, but there is most definitely a Devil card in the tarot, and,
in my opinion, he is the most universally misunderstood character in the entire
deck. (But then, you probably guessed I would say that.)
        This is the trump of Capricorn, the sign of the goat. Indeed, for the purpose
of fortune telling, the Devil has truly been the scapegoat for all the perceived evils
that could befall us, and the sinful temptations that are constantly luring us toward
self-destruction. How convenient!
        But if the Devil is supposed to be the card that represents evil, which card
should we pick to represent good? All the other trumps have the potential of rep-
resenting the qualities of both good and evil. Why do we need one card just for
evil?
        Can't the Fool be thoughtless enough; the Magus larcenous enough, the High
Priestess seductive enough, the Empress wicked enough, the Emperor tyrannical
138                                            Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


enough, the Hierophant bigoted enough, the Lovers unfaithful enough, the Chariot
pretentious enough, Lust lascivious enough, the Hermit self-abusive enough, Fortune
ill-fated enough, Adjustment unfair enough, the Hanged Man tormented enough,
Death murderous enough, Art chaotic enough, the Tower catastrophic enough, the
Star despondent enough, the Moon deceitful enough, the Sun narcissistic enough,
the Aeon destructive enough, or the Universe cold and cruel enough to handle all
the evil in the world?
      It should be obvious that the Devil is something other than the ultimate evil.
That something other is just what his full title proclaims. He is Lord of the Gates
of Matter. That, in itself, can be pretty scary, especially if you've been convinced
that earthly life is somehow an estrangement from God, and that all things on the
material plane, including you and me, are inherently evil. Grow up!
      Whatever the supreme being is, it would not be the supreme being if it weren't
everything, including you and me—and the Devil. It seems pretty obvious that the
Devil is just God as misunderstood by the ignorant and wicked. Crowley explains
it like this:


      This card represents creative energy in its most material form; in the Zodiac,
      Capricornus occupies the Zenith. It is the most exalted of the signs; it is the
      goat leaping with lust upon the summits of earth. .. . In this sign, Mars is
      exalted, showing in its best form the fiery, material energy of creation. The
      card represents Pan Pangenetor, the All-Begetter.'”


      Crowley tells us elsewhere, that the Fool, the Hermit, and the Devil, “offer a
threefold explanation of the male creative energy; but this card (The Devil) espe-
cially represents the masculine energy at its most masculine.”? Masculine energy
at its most masculine, indeed! Look at the card! I don’t have to draw you a picture;
Lady Harris could hardly have been more explicit. The whole card is the Devil. A
magnificent three-eyed Himalayan goat stands before a tree and its two great trans-
parent globular roots. Perhaps most interesting are the figures in the testes.
    In traditional tarot decks, the Devil trump shows a woman and a man standing
beneath the Devil in curious attitudes of worship and bondage. These figures are
translated in the Harris painting as four female forms in the left testicle and four
male forms in the right. The top male form bears the classic horned head of the
Devil, who appears to have fought his way to the top. The pairs of broken lines are
insinuative of chromosomes, and the starry rays at the equator of the globes suggest
cellular division. This is the Devil the world has been taught to fear. He is life itself,
unrestrained, in mad love and seeking to grow and unite with absolutely everything.

      The formula of this card is then the complete appreciation of all existing
      things. He rejoices in the rugged and the barren no less than in the smooth
Atu of Tabuti—the Major Arcana Trumps                                             139


    and the fertile. All things equally exalt him. He represents the finding of
    ecstasy in every phenomenon, however naturally repugnant; he transcends
    all limitations; he is Pan; he is Alll."*


    In The Wake World, Crowley spins a charming fairytale of a little girl's initia-
tory trip up the Tree of Life. Her name is Lola, and her guide is her Holy Guardian
Angel, whom she calls her Fairy Prince. When they reach path 26 (that of Ayin
and the Devil) they attend a strange banquet on a desolate heath.


    It was midnight, and the Devil came down and sat in the midst; but my
    Fairy Prince whispered: “Hush! it is a great secret, but his name is Yeheswah,
    and he is the Saviour of the World.” And that was very funny, because the
    girl next to me thought it was Jesus Christ, till another Fairy Prince (my
    Prince’s brother) whispered as he kissed her: “Hush! tell nobody ever, that is
    Satan, and he is the Saviour of the World.”
140                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


ATU XVI
THE TOWER

                               The Lord of the Hosts of the Mighty

                                Planetary Trump of Mars

                               Original Design: A tower struck by forked light-
                               ning. Human figures thrown thence suggest the
                               letter 9 (Ayin) by their attitude.'"*

                               Hebrew Letter: Pé (mouth).

                               Tree of Life: Path 27, joining @ Netzach—Victory,
                               to © Hod—Splendor.

                               Colors: Scarlet; Red; Venetian Red; Bright Red,
                               rayed azure or emerald.

                               Break down thefortress ofthine Individual
                               Self, that thy Truth may springfreefrom the
                               ruins!”


      The House of God appears to me as a vortex not a mouth, or is it yours
      which can't be filled by mortal effort try as you may.’
                                                —Harnis to Crowley, date uncertain.


Have you ever watched the phases of a large construction project? In the first phase,
the land is cleared by smoke-belching bulldozers. Trees are ruthlessly ripped from
their roots. Grass and vegetation is plowed under and raked away, then cut up or
burned. It is a scene of utter destruction and desolation. If you were to take a pho-
tograph of the site at the end of phase one, you would have a picture of a catastro-
phe. However, in a year or two, the picture changes. Construction has taken place,
and now there stands a magnificent building, landscaped with grass and trees and
flowers, and perhaps a beautiful little waterfall and lake with a swan or two.
      In the Thoth Tarot, phase one is represented by Atu XVI, the Tower,and phase
two is represented by Atu XX, the Aeon. The Tower is not the end of the world; it
just looks like the end of the world. It is, quite simply, what Crowley calls “the man-
ifestation of cosmic energy in its grossest form.”"”
      The Tower is the planetary trump of Mars, and it incorporates most of the
images that characterize traditional versions—a blasted tower with human figures
falling from it. Most older versions, however, show the tower being struck by light-
ning from above, as if by some heavenly wrath. In Harris’ vision, the tower is blasted
Atu of
    Tabuti—the Mayor Arcana Trumps                                                   141


from below
       by flames belching from the mouth ofthe underworld (The Hebrew letter
Pé means mouth). This is a most significant reverse in symbolic imagery. Another
feature unique to the Harris version is the presence of a large eye at the top of the
card that seems to radiate a zigzag of lightning or fire that may be the spark
                                                                           that has
ignited the flames from the mouth below.
    In The Book ofThoth, this eye, which Crowley refers to alternately as the Eye
of Horus and the Eye of Shiva, causes him to wax quite philosophic. He even teases
us with comments relating to sex magick and the eye:


    There is a special technical magical meaning, which is explained openly
    only to initiates of the Eleventh degree of the O.T.O.;a grade so secret that
    it ts not even listed in the ofÏcial documents. It is not even to be under-
    stood by study of the Eye in Atu XV. Perhaps it is lawful to mention that
    the Arab sages and the Persian poets have written, not always guardedly, on
    the subject.”


    If all this “eye” stuff is so secret, why even bring up the subject? This is an
extremely narrow and esoteric reference that Crowley knew full well would not be
understood or appreciated by the vast majority of readers. Obviously, the eyes refer
to various body openings and the psychic centers to which they are linked. While
all this is very interesting from a clinical sex-magick point of view, it really doesn’t
help us too much in understanding the general meaning of this trump. The concept
of the Eye of Shiva, on the other hand, does.
    The Hindu Trinity of Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva respectively create, sustain,
and destroy the universe. Shiva is the God of Destruction and, to destroy the uni-
verse, Crowley, warns, he need only open his eye.


    Shiva is represented as dancing upon the bodies of his devotees. To under-
    stand this is not easy for most western minds. Briefly, the doctrine is that the
    ultimate reality (which is Perfection) is Nothingness. Hence all manifesta-
    tions, however glorious, however delightful, are stains. To obtain perfection,
    all existing things must be annihilated.”


    The traditional title of the Tower is “The House of God,” or “Destruction of
the House of God.” In chapter I, verse 57, of The Book ofthe Law, the goddess Nuit
makes a direct reference:


    Invoke me under my stars! Love is the law, love under will. Nor let the fools
    mistake love; for there are love and love. There is the dove, and there is the
    serpent. Choose ye well! He, my prophet, hath chosen, knowing the law of
    the fortress, and the great mystery of the House of God.
142                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


      We see the dove and the serpent near the great eye at the top of the card. The
dove has an olive branch in its mouth. Crowley desribes the image like this:


      The Serpent is portrayed as the Lion-Serpent Xnoubis or Abraxas. These
      represent the two forms of desire; what Schopenhauer would have called the
      Will to Live and the Will to Die. They represent the feminine and mascu-
      line impulses; the nobility of the latter is possibly based upon recognition of
      the futility of the former. This is perhaps why the renunciation of love in all
      the ordinary senses of the word has been so constantly announced as the first
      step towards initiation. This is an unnecessarily rigid view. This Trump is
      not the only card in the Pack, nor are the “will to live” and the “will to die”
      incompatible.”


      Placed in perspective, this is not such a bad card after all. The citizen of the
Aeon of Horus is no longer to fear natural processes depicted in the Tower.When
the DuQuette’s own Crowned and Conquering Child (our son, Jean-Paul) was four
years old, he asked me what will eventually happen to the world. I told him that
nobody knows for sure, but that the Hindus worship a God called Shiva who is
responsible for destroying the universe. “All Shiva has to do is open his eye,” I said,
“and the universe is completely destroyed. What do you think of that?” Without a
moment's hesitation he answered, “Then he closes his other eye.”
      I'm still thinking about that.
Atu of
    Tahuti—the Major Arcana Trumps                                                143


ATU XVII
THE STAR

The Daughter of the Firmament

The Dweller between the Waters

Zodiacal Trump of Aquarius

Saturn Rules, Neptune Exalted

Original Design: The figure of a water-nymph dis-
porting herself. A woman, naked and kneeling on
her left knee, pours from a vase in her right hand
silver waters into a river, by which grow roses, the
haunts of coloured butterflies. With her left hand,
she pours golden waters over her head, which are
lost in her long hair. Her attitude suggests the
Swastika. Above flames a great star of seven rays.'?

Hebrew Letter: Hé (window).

Tree of Life: Path 15, joining @ Chokmah—Wisdom to ® Tiphareth—Beauty.

Colors: Violet; Sky Blue; Bluish Mauve; White, tinged purple.

Pour water on thyself: thus shalt thou be
a Fountain to the Universe.

Find thou thyselfin every Star!

Achieve thou every possibility!"


    I think, looking at the finished cards you will remember all the sequences
    you have forgotten & I shall be crushed by alterations which will confuse the
    structural design & any spectator without your knowledge & so suffer little
    children to come unto thee & confuse them not by too much symbolism &
    stay thy hand from poor Frieda’s tormented visions."
                                               —Harris to Crowley, date uncertain.


Drawing from imagery found in the first chapter of The Book ofthe Law, the Star
is one of the most intensely Thelemic cards in the deck. To truly appreciate its
secrets, one must be familiar with the contents of that chapter and cognizant of its
possible meanings. The central subject is Nuit (Nuith) herself. Here, she is not pic-
144                                            Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


tured as the infinite arch of the night sky (as we see her on the Stéle or Atu XX, the
Aeon), but tangibly personified as a beautiful goddess.
      The three seven-pointed stars that populate this card are versions of the Star
of Babalon, and reveal to us (if we haven't already figured it out) that Nuit and
Babalon are, to Crowley, two aspects of the same goddess: “Babalon,” he tells us,
“is yet a further materialization of the original idea of Nuith; she is the Scarlet
Woman, the sacred Harlot who is the lady of Atu XI.” He also refers to the seven-
pointed star as “the Star of Venus, as if declaring the principal characteristic of her
nature to be Love.””’
      The abode of Babalon/Nuit on the Tree of Life is the third sephira, Binah, the
Supernal Sother. In the great name, Yod Hé Vau Hé, the mother is the first Hé. It
makes perfect sense to attribute Hé to this trump, which presents the sublime image
of the goddess of infinite space.
      The Harris Star is very faithful to the original description (see above). She
even includes the roses and butterflies (seen in the lower right corner) that are
absent in more traditional decks. The river, which is a bit hard to see, flows at the
bottom of the card and is demarcated by hills on the distant shore. Perhaps the
most exciting departure from the traditional versions of the Star is the huge celes-
tial globe that dominates the card. This globe is often mistakenly identified as the
Earth. If it were the Earth, it would dramatically diminish the spiritual and cosmic
scale of this card.
     The celestial globe represents the entire heavens surrounding the Earth.
Therefore, all other images on this card that are placed outside of the celestial sphere
must represent spiritual environments that transcend even the concept of infinite
space. The largest and smallest of the three stars are found outside the celestial
sphere: the former spins counterclockwise like a cosmic pinwheel in the upper left
corner of the card; the latter tumbles clockwise like a tiny star-seed from the golden
bowl in the goddess’s right hand. The third star whirls counterclockwise on the
celestial sphere itself.
      The two cups in her hands, Crowley writes, are fashioned as breasts, “as it is writ-
ten, ‘the milk of the stars from her paps; yea, the milk of the stars from her paps.”
“From the golden cup,” he continues, “she pours this ethereal water, which is also
milk and oil and blood, upon her own head, indicating the eternal renewal of the
categories, the inexhaustible possibilities of existence.” Crowley completes the
description thus:


      The left hand, lowered, holds a silver cup, from which also she pours the
      immortal liquor of her life. (This liquor is the Amrita of the Indian philoso-
      phers, the Nepenthe and Ambrosia of the Greeks, the Alkahest and
      Universal Medicine of the Alchemists, the Blood of the Grail; or, rather, the
      nectar which is the mother of that blood.”"*
Atu of Tahuti—the Mayor Arcana Trumps                                              145


    Traditionally, the Star is the card of hope—the promise of things unseen. What

is the hope that Nuit offers us? What is the promise of our star goddess? I wish I
could simply reprint the entire first chapter of The Book ofthe Law and show you,
but this short excerpt might give you some idea:


    I give unimaginable joys on earth: certainty, not faith, while in life, upon
    death; peace unutterable, rest, ecstasy; nor do I demand aught in sacrifice."
146                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


ATU XVIII
THE   MOON

                               The Ruler of the Flux and Reflux

                               The Child of the Sons of the Mighty

                                Zodiacal Trump of Pisces

                               Jupiter Rules—Venus Exalted

                               Original Design: The waning Moon. Below, a path
                               leads between two towers, guarded byjackals, from
                               the sea, wherein a Scarabus marcheth landwards.'®

                               Hebrew Letter: Qoph (back of head).
             fae

            ie        /        Tree of Life: Path 29, joining @ Netzach—Victory
              anf
 4           ant          to @ Malkuth—Kingdom.

                               Colors: Crimson (ultra Violet); Buff, flecked silver
White; Light translucent pinkish Brown; Stone color.

Let the Illuston ofthe Worldpass over thee,
unheeded, as thou goestfrom the Midnight
to the Morning."


      In this Trump, her lowest avatar, she joins the earthy sphere of Netzach with
      Malkuth, the moon of witchcraft and abominable deeds. She is the poisoned
      darkness which is the condition of the rebirth of light.’


There is no doubt about it, this is a spooky card. It represents the light that dark-
ness creates. It is the light that illuminates your dreams—and your nightmares.
      We recall that the trump attributed to the Moon is Atu II, the Priestess. She
is the waxing Moon and represents Luna in her higher aspect, that of forming a
link between the human and the divine. (The path of the Priestess crosses the Abyss
and joins Tiphareth and Kether.) Atu XVIII, the Moon, is a very different aspect
of Luna, and the most cheerful thing I can think to say about it is, “It will change.”
      Now, before many of my brothers and sisters in the Craft take offence, let me
hasten to point out that the “witchcraft” Crowley is referring to in the above quote
is not the nature-loving and life-afÏrming religions of the neopagan movements
that have proliferated around the world since his death in 1947. It is more the imag-
ined witchcraft spawned in the tortured and obscene fantasies of the fanatic witch
hunters.
Atu of Tahuti—the Major Arcana Trumps                                                  147


    The moonlight of Atu XVIII is that which illuminates the phantasmagoric
nightmares of all of us who cannot acknowledge the dark horrors of our own fears.
The Moon card shows a path through and beyond this nightmare, but it is not an
easy path, and the myths of all ages and cultures prove that this journey through
“the poisoned darkness” is an obligatory chapter in every hero's quest. As Crowley
warns:


    This path is guarded by Tabu. She is uncleanliness and sorcery. Upon the
     hills are the black towers of nameless mystery, of horror and of fear. All prej-
     udice, all superstition, dead tradition and ancestral loathing, all combine to
    darken her face before the eyes of men. It needs unconquerable courage to
     begin to tread this path.'”


     Harris's rendering is disturbingly haunting, but it is not too dissimilar to the tra-
ditional image. The path runs between two towers guarded by twin figures of the
Egyptian god Anubus, god of embalming and guardian of cities of the dead. Poison
blood drips from the dying Moon. The creature walking out of the water at the
bottom of the card represents the scarab beetle, symbolic of the Egyptian god
Kephra, who is the god of the Sun at midnight.
    Traditional decks usually show a crawfish, or even a lobster, instead of the
scarab, and the symbolism of the Lord of the Sun at midnight becomes somewhat
lost in memories of melted butter. I must confess, Harris's scarab doesn't look very
scaraby either. In fact, it is a water spider. Nevertheless, it carries the Sun out of the
dark water and, by doing so, assures us that this awful night will eventually come to
an end. InThe Book of Thoth, Crowley also assures the courageous seeker in his last
words concerning this card:


     One is reminded of the mental echo of subconscious realization, of that
     supreme iniquity which mystics have constantly celebrated in their accounts
    of the Dark Night of the Soul. But the best men, the true men, do not con-
     sider the matter in such terms at all. Whatever horrors may afÒict the soul,
    whatever abominations may excite the loathing of the heart, whatever terrors
     may assail the mind, the answer is the same at every stage: “How splendid is
     the Adventure!”"*
148                                             Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


ATU XIX
THE SUN

                               The Lord of the Fire of the World

                               Planetary Trump of the Sun

                               Onginal Design: A Sun. Below is a wall, in front of
                               which, in a fairy ring, two children wantonly and
                               shamelessly embrace.'*

                               Hebrew Letter: Resh (head).

                               Tree of Life: Path 30, joining © Hod—Splendor to
                               @ Yesod—Foundation.

                               Colors: Orange; Gold Yellow; Rich Amber; Amber,
                               rayed red.


Giveforth thy light to all without doubt:
the clouds and shadows are no matterfor thee.

Make Speech and Silence, Energy and Stillness,
twinforms ofthy play."


      Every man and every woman is a star.'*”


In fortune telling traditions, the Sun is often interpreted as the card representing
the querent, or the face the querent shows to the world. This indicates to me that,
deep down inside, all of us are inherently aware that we are ultimately solar beings.
Crowley explains:


      This is one of the simplest of the cards; it represents Heru-ra-ha, the Lord of
      the New Aeon, in his manifestation to the race of men as the Sun spiritual,
      moral, and physical. He is the Lord of Light, Life, Liberty and Love. This
      Aeon has for its purpose the complete emancipation of the human race."


      That is quite a statement, and I believe Crowley meant every word of it.
Whenever I am asked to explain the philosophy or, if you prefer, the religion of
Thelema, the first thing | usually tell people is, “It is a modern form of Sun wor-
ship.” But then, I am quick to add, “And when I use the word ‘Sun,’ I am also refer-
ring to myself.”
Atu of Tabuti—the Major Arcana Trumps                                               149


    Whether or not Crowley would have agreed with my gross generalization is
debatable. I believe, however, that it does describe in the most primitive terms the
essence of
         Thelema. Now that human consciousness has been subtly “mutated” with
the knowledge that Sun continually exists—that it neither dies at night nor plunges
toward extinction in the autumn—we as a race are poised to identify our own con-
sciousness with the same phenomenon.
                                 Just as sunlight is perpetual, consciousness
is continuous. Death is an illusion every bit as much as night is an illusion.
Immortality is simply consciousness of the continuity of existence.
    Heru-ra-ha is a unique name for the two opposite and equal forms of the
Egyptian god Horus. Hoor-pa-kraat, is the passive, innocent, god of silence and
infinite potential, often portrayed as a baby curled in the fetal position, pressing his
thumb or forefinger to his lips. Ra- Hoor-Khut'® is the active, violent, hawk-headed
avenger of the gods. Combined under the one name Heru-ra-ha, they are the divine
expression of the passive/active dynamics of the element Spirit.'* Harris depicts
the classic Egyptian images of both these gods in Atu XX, the Acon.
    Why should the Sun, the ultimate symbol of unity and singularity in our solar
system, be identified with this double nature? From time immemorial, the doctrine
of twin suns has bubbled secretly in the sanctuaries of the mysteries. Ancient tra-
ditions speak of a twin of Earth’s Sun about which it and our entire solar system
rotate in a cycle dance of hundreds of millions of years. Early Gnostic Christians
dubbed Satan the twin of Christ, suggesting a great solar mystery hidden in the
relationship.
    Whatever may have been the original circumstances and motives that created
these ancient traditions, modern science afÏrms that the secret of the Sun is indeed
the perpetual struggle of two titanic forces: the active, thermonuclear process that
burns the Suns fuel and radiates light and energy outward into space, and the pas-
sive, gravitational presence of the Sun's own mass. The former keeps the Sun from
collapsing in upon itself; the later keeps the burning process perpetually contained
and stable.
    The twin babies in the Fool card, and the children and the bride and groom in
the Lovers are earlier tarot incarnations of the two dancing children we find in the
Sun card. According to Crowley:


    They represent the male and female, eternally young, shameless and inno-
    cent. They are dancing in the light, and yet they dwell upon the earth. They
    represent the next stage which is to be attained by mankind, in which com-
    plete freedom is alike the cause and the result of the new access of solar
    energy upon the earth."*
150                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


ATU XX
THE AEON

                                The Spirit of the Primal Fire

                                Elemental Trump of Fire and of Spirit

                                Original Design: Israfel blowing the last trumpet.
                                The dead arising from their tombs. Angel blowing
                                a trumpet, adorned with a golden banner bearing a
                                white cross. Below, a fair youth rises from a sar-
                                cophagus in the attitude of the god Shu supporting
                                the firmament. On his left, a fair woman, her arms
                                give the sign of water—an inverted triangle on the
                                breast. On his right a dark man gives the sign of
                                fire—an upright triangle on the forehead.'”

                                Hebrew Letter: Shin (tooth).

Tree of Life: Path 31, joining © Hod—Splendor to ® Malkuth—Kingdom.

Colors for Fire: Glowing Orange Scarlet; Vermilion; Scarlet, flecked gold;
Vermilion, flecked crimson; and Emerald.

Colors for Spirit: White merging into Grey; Deep Purple, nearly Black; The seven
prismatic colors (violet outside); White, Red, Yellow, Blue, Black (this outside).

Be every Act an Act ofLove and Worship!

Be every Act the Fiat of God!

Be every Act a Source ofradiant Glory.


      Ra-Hoor-Khuit hath taken his seat in the East and the Equinox of the
      Gods.'TM


The traditional name of this card is Judgment, or The Last Judgment. The tradi-
tional design shows the Archangel Israfel blowing his trumpet to announce the end
of the world as the dead arise from their tombs. In chapter 6, which is actually an
expanded commentary on this card, I attempted to explain why Crowley replaced
The Last Judgment with the Aeon in the Thoth Tarot. The reader who has not yet
read that chapter is strongly advised to do so now. I will sum up what I wrote there
simply by saying that, according to Crowley, the Last Judgment trump is now obso-
lete. The event that it depicted (the destruction of the world by fire) has already
Atu of Tahuti—the Major Arcana Trumps                                                 151


occurred. The world we are talking about, of course, is the spiritual Age of Osiris.
the Aeon card of the Thoth Tarot depicts the spiritual forces that initiated the next
age, the Aeon of Horus.
     Crowley saw this event as a magical changing-of-the guard that was fore-
shadowed symbolically by one of the regular seasonal ceremonies of the Golden
Dawn. Every six months, the ritual ofÏcers of that order were ceremonially pro-
moted one chair up, and new secret passwords were issued. In that ritual, the ofÏ-
cer who had formerly served as second-in-command (who, in that position, had
magically assumed the identity of the Egyptian God Horus) was installed to serve
as Hierophant (symbolized by Osiris) for the next six months.
                                                           The Book ofthe Law
calls the cosmic version of this ceremony The Equinox of the Gods.
     Horus is the God of Force and Fire, and his ascension as Lord of the New
Aeon spiritually destroys the old world by fire. It only looks like the end of the
world to those of us who cannot accept the possibility that old spiritual points of
view can ever be replaced by new ones.
    As we learned in chapter 5, Crowley asserted that the latest Equinox of the
Gods took place on March 20, 1904 £.v. in Cairo. Triggering the events that led
up to this moment was the psychic possession of Crowley's wife, Rose, and their
discovery of a twenty-fifth dynasty funeral stéle. Among many other features, the
stéle shows the God Horus (Ra-Hoor-Khuit) on a throne. Before him is a table of
offerings. Standing beside the table is the deceased, Ankh-af-na-Khonsu.
    Nuit (Nut), the goddess of the night sky and infinite space, arches her body
over the entire top section of the stéle. Directly beneath her heart is a winged solar
disk that The Book ofthe Law refers to as the god Hadit.
    In Atu XX, the Aeon, Harris interprets the stéle in one of the most colorful
and aesthetically pleasing of all the trumps. The Goddess Nuit, her body filled with
stars, her breasts alive with the milk of whirling galaxies, forms a beautiful blue
omega as she bends in ecstasy around an immense egg containing the seated image
of Ra-Hoor-Khuit. He holds the phoenix wand in his right hand. His left hand is
empty. Standing as a transparent essence before Ra-Hoor-Khuit is his twin, Hoor-
pa-kraat (see the Sun), his finger at his lips in the sign of silence. His head is shaven
(except for his Horus lock) and crowned with two Uraeus serpents.
    The God Hadit, pictured as the winged solar disk, is nearly camouflaged by
the entire scene. This is most appropriate, for these are among his open words in The
Book ofthe Law:


    In the sphere I am everywhere the centre, as she, the circumference, is
    nowhere found. Yet she shall be known & I never.'®


    The Hebrew letter Shin is assigned to the Aeon, and a large Shin containing
three embryonic figures appears at the bottom of the card. It flames in front of a very
152                                          Understanding Aleister Crowley’s Thoth Tarot


stylized set of scales, perhaps pointing to the Aeon that will follow the Aeon of
Horus, that of Maat, the goddess ofjustice and balance.
      Crowley ends his discussion of this card with a comparison of the world events
of approximately two thousand years ago, at the advent and birth of the last Acon.
His words carry a chilling but ultimately hopeful message:


      The time for the birth of an Aeon seems to be indicated by great concentra-
      tion of political power with the accompanying improvements in the means
      of travel and communication, with a general advance in philosophy and sci-
      ence, with a general need of consolidation in religious thought. It is very
      instructive to compare the events of the five hundred years preceding and
      following the crisis of approximately 2,000 years ago, with those of similar
      periods centred in 1904 of the old era. It is though far from comforting to
      the present generation, that 500 years of Dark Ages are likely to be upon us.
      But if the analogy holds, that is the case. Fortunately, to-day we have
      brighter torches and more torch-bearers.'”
Atu of Tabuti—the Major Arcana Trumps                                               153


ATU XXI
THE UNIVERSE

The Great One of the Night of Time

Planetary Trump of Saturn

Elemental Trump of Earth

Original Design: Should contain a demonstration
of the Quadrature of the Circle. An ellipse, com-
posed of 400 lesser circles. At the corners of the
card a man, an eagle, a bull, and a lion. Within the
circle, a naked shining figure with female breasts,
with closed eyes in the sign of Earth—right foot
advanced, right hand advance and raised, left hand
lowered and thrown back. The hands grip each a
ray of dazzling light, spiral, the right hand being
dextro- and the left hand levo-rotary. A red scarf
conceals the fact of male genital organs, and suggests by its shape the letter 3.
Such is the conventional hieroglyph.’

Hebrew Letter: Tau (cross).

Tree of Life: Path 32,joining ® Yesod—Foundation to ® Malkuth—Kingdom.

Colors for Saturn: Indigo; Black; Blue-black; Black, rayed blue.

Colors for Earth: Citrine; Olive; Russet and Black; Amber; Dark Brown; Black,
flecked Yellow.

Treat time and all conditions ofEvent as
Servants ofthy Will, appointed to present the
Universe to thee in theform ofthy Plan.

And: blessing and worship to the prophet ofthe lovely Star.'*


    The elemental Cherubims are quite jolly but the Little Lady has twisted
     and turned ‘til 1 am insane with the wiggling lines and I’ve done about
     forty drawings of her.'”
                                                —Harris to Crowley, date uncertain.


For many years, the Universe has served as the cover image ofWeiser editions of The
Book of Thoth. It is without question one of the most recognizable cards of the
154                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


Thoth Tarot. Familiar as it is to us, it is one of the most complex and mysterious cards
in the deck. There are several elements in the card I don't understand at all. For
instance, what is the black crescent-shaped object in the goddess’s right hand? I
don't have a clue. I can’t find any reference to it inThe Book of Thoth. If Crowley
explains it in any other writings, I confess it has escaped me completely. My best guess
is that it is a sickle (not an inappropriate weapon for a Saturnian goddess). It looks
like she is sticking the sharp end right in the middle of the big eye at the top of the
card, perhaps causing it to erupt in glories of light—but | can’t say for sure.
     There are several other images in the card that I didn’t see until I had the card
enlarged and enhanced. I'll talk about those in a moment. First, let’s start with what
we know from Crowley's own comments:


      In the card itself there is consequently a glyph of the completion of the
      Great Work in its highest sense, exactly as the Atu of the Fool symbolizes its
      beginning. The Fool is the negative issuing into manifestation; the Universe
      is that manifestation, its purpose accomplished, ready to return. The twenty
      cards that lie between these two exhibit the Great Work and its agents in
      various stages. The image of the Universe in this sense is accordingly that of
      a maiden, the final letter of the Tetragrammaton'”

    Atu XX], the Universe, represents both the planet Saturn and the element
earth. We already know earth is in some ways a real second-class citizen in the
Qabalistic universe. We also know that because earth is lowest, it ironically plays a
pivotal role in the cosmic scheme of things.
     Saturn is also very special. As Binah's representative, it is the only planetary
sphere above the Abyss. In many ways, it is the highest of the high. At the same
time, on the Tree of Life, the path of the Universe (32) leads from Yesod (the ninth
and last true sephira on the Tree) down into Malkuth (which is only pendant to
the Tree, a cosmic dingleberry). How strange that the highest high and the lowest
low would be represented by the same card. The Universe must indeed hold many
mysteries, something Crowley confirms in this passage:


      The first and most obvious characteristic of this card is that it comes at the
      end of all, and is therefore the complement of the Fool. It is attributed to the
      letter Tau. The two cards together accordingly spell the word Ath, which
      means Essence. All reality is consequently compromised in the series of
      which these two letters form the beginning and the end. This beginning was
      Nothing; the end must therefore be also Nothing, but Nothing in its com-
      plete expansion, as was previously explained.”
Atu ofTabuti—the Mayor Arcana Trumps                                                155


    As we see from the original description, Atu XX], the Universe, should con-

tain a demonstration of the “Quadrature of the Circle.” Good Luck! For centuries,
it has been the quest of mystic mathematicians to square the circle or construct, by
using only a compass and a straight edge, a square of precisely the same circumfer-
ence as that of any given circle. It would be the geometric equivalent of building
the New Jerusalem—the marriage of the eternal circle of heaven to the terrestrial
square of Earth.
    In 1882, German mathematician Carl Louis Ferdinand von Lindemann finally
demonstrated that the perfect squaring of the circle is a mathematical impossibil-
ity. However, thousands of years of attempting the impossible has produced a body
of graphic and architectural devices that have supplied the patterns and propor-
tions for temples and cathedrals, sacred statuary, and paintings. It has also provided
us with the blueprint for Atu XX], the Universe.
    Bold seekers have also introduced into this quest collateral data, such as the
mysterious numbers that appear in the Old and New Testaments, and the esti-
mated size and ratios of planetary orbits. The mental stimulation and ecstasy such
mathematical gymnastics induce can be addictive, to the point of triggering emo-
tional instability. British architect, William Stirling, author of the monumental work
The Canon: An Exposition ofthe Pagan Mystery Perpetuated in the Cabala as the Rule
ofAll the Arts, died most hideously while attempting to sever his own head from
his body.” (One can think too much about such things.)
    I confess that I become hopelessly lost whenever I try to follow the logic and
numbers of transcendental mathematics. What I do understand is the aesthetic
beauty of the figures such musings produce when translated into graphic designs,
especially the diagram called, appropriately, the New Jerusalem. Because I cannot
explain exactly why this diagram is an attempt to square the circle, I will instead
try to show you how it is constructed and allow you decide whether or not to pursue
its mysteries further. (But, please, try not to lose your head!)
    The New Jerusalem and the Universe trump both start with a special oval called
a vesica piscis (a fish bladder). We see the vesica in two places on the Universe card:
as the large oval that touches the top, bottom, and sides of the card, and as the eye
at the top right section of the large vesica. The small eye vesica appears either to
be projecting the images on to the card, or drawing them all back inside itself.
    It is very easy to create a vesica piscus, and the beginning of its construction
employs Qabalistic concepts that by now should be familiar to you.
156                                                Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


  1. First, you must have two circles of equal size that intersect at their centers.
      (The first circle is Kether,which unites with its reflection, Chokmah, to create
      the opening, the Yoni of Mother Binah from which will issue all creation). The
      vesica was the floor plan of many cathedrals of the late Renaissance and early
      Baroque periods, structures that were nearly all dedicated to Our Lady.


  2. Next, enclose and center the vesica inside a third circle the same size as the
     other two (It is as though the supernal triad has made and positioned the
      vesica). It looks like an eye, doesn’t it?


  3. Enclose the vesica with a square that is the same length and breadth as the
      length of the vesica.
Atu of Tahuti—the Major Arcana Trumps                                             157


  4. Draw four circles at the diagonal corners whose centers intersect the great
    circle, and whose circumferences touch the vesica.


  5. Finally, enclose all within a square.


    There it is. This is the basic model for both the traditional and the Crowley-
Harris versions of the Universe. You may also recognize this design as pattern for
many paintings and stained-glass windows that depict Christ, or the Holy Family,
or the Trinity surrounded by the images of the angel or man, the lion, the bull, and
the eagle. In the Harris-Crowley card, the four Kerubic creatures are placed in the
corners in the same manner as in the Hierophant.
     For reasons that have never been very clear to me, Christian believers are told
these creatures represent respectively the four Evangelists: Mathew, Mark, Luke, and
John. Jews naturally recognize them as the symbols for the four tribes of Israel, who
were assigned the corner positions in the camp of the Israelites:'? the man of the
tribe of Reuben, the lion ofJudah, the bull of Ephriam, and the eagle of Dan. We,
of course, recognize them as the four Kerubic beasts.
158                                            Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


      Even though the original description states the vesica should be an ellipse com-
posed of 400 lesser circles (a reference to the Hebrew letter Tau assigned to this
card, which enumerates to 400), Lady Harris does well to give us seventy-two cir-
cles'* (yes, I counted them), which provocatively suggest (to me at least) the ribbed
skeleton of an infinitely huge serpent.
      Now that we know that Lady Harris gave it the old college try to squaring the
circle, let’s get out our magnifying glass and look at the all the wonderful things
she puts inside it. At the bottom point of the vesica is a skeletal structure that looks
a bit like the blueprint of a building. That is exactly what it is—it is the house of
matter. If the structure were projected in three dimensions, we would see a four-
sided building and that each of the tiny vertical lines represents one of the ninety-
two then known elements. They are ingeniously arranged in hierarchical order and
joined by a series of diagonal lines that form a diagram of the chemical building
blocks of the material universe. The model for this design first appeared in The Bases
ofModern Science, by J. W. N. Sullivan.'”
      Impressive as this diagram is, Harris superimposes it upon a structure even
more magnificent and mysterious. If you look carefully, you will see that Sullivan's
house of matter is projected upon the largest of three pyramids suggestive of those
at the Giza complex. Like the Great Pyramid at Giza, the apex of the large pyra-
mid in the center of Harris's drawing is also covered with finishing stones, making
it appear to swell a bit at the top.
      Crowley makes no reference to these pyramids in The Book of Thoth, and my
poor mind boggles at the possible implications. He does mention something we
can't see—at least I can’t see it:


      In the centre, a wheel of Light initiates the form of the Tree of Life, shewing
      the ten principal bodies of the solar system. But this Tree is not visible
      except to those of wholly pure heart.’


      Well I guess I’m busted! Emperor Lon has no clothes! As if I really need the
Master Therion to tell me I'm not wholly pure of heart! I'm really not surprised I
can't see his damned Tree of Life in the center of this card.
      What I can see is a beautiful green sphere upon which sits a complex Mébius
strip.'” Actually, it’s not that complex. It’s just a regular Mébius strip made from three
half twists rather than just one. (Yes, I made one to be sure.) The endlessness of a
Mobius strip makes it a perfect and beautiful glyph of the infinite, and it is my
guess that Lady Harris replaced Crowley’s invisible Tree of Life with this brilliantly
appropriate device.
      The main feature of the card is the beautiful “Little Lady” Crowley refers to in
this passage:
Atu of
    Tahuti—the Mayor Arcana Trumps                                                   159


    In the present card she is represented as a dancing figure. In her hands she

    manipulates the radiant spiral force, the active and passive, each possessing its
    dual polarity. Her dancing partner is shown as Heru-Ra-Ha of Atu XIX.'”


    Is she Nuit/Babalon, goddess of the sphere of Saturn, Binah? Or is she the
virgin princess of the sphere of earth, Malkuth? She is, in truth, both the great
mother and the virgin daughter of eternity.
    What could possibly serve as the model for this goddess who is at once the
beginning and the end and all things in between? What vision could have embold-
ened Lady Harris to give such solid form to this formless and eternal process?
    On the afternoon of December 6, 1909, between the hours of 2:00 and 4:15 p.m.
in a lonely valley of fine sand in the desert near Bou-Sada, North Africa, Aleister
Crowley, accompanied by the poet Victor Nueberg, who served as his servant and
magical scribe, crossed the Abyss’” and experienced the terrible vision of the tenth
Enochian Aethyr. The details of this ordeal are chronicled in The Viston and the
Voice,'” and remain the central features of one of the most breathtaking and remark-
able magical visions ever recorded.
    The next evening, December 7, 1909, between 9:30 and 11:10 p.m., while his
consciousness still thrilled with the bliss of that magical plateau, he experienced
the vision of the next Aethyr, the ninth. I have excerpted a large portion of that
vision, because I believe that there is nothing I or anyone else could say about Atu
XXq], the Universe, that could be more profound or relevant. It is nothing less than
an account of a face-to-face encounter with the goddess of Atu XX], the Universe.


    She has very deep eye-lids, and long lashes. Her eyes are closed, or nearly
    closed. It is impossible to say anything about her. She is naked; her whole body
    is covered with fine gold hairs, that are the electric flames that are the spears of
    mighty and terrible Angels whose breast-plates are the scales of her skin. And
    the hair of her head, that flows down to her feet, is the very light of God him-
    self. Of all the glories beheld by the seer in the Aethyrs, there is not one which
    is worthy to be compared with her littlest finger-nail. For although he may not
    partake of the Aethyr, without the ceremonial preparations, even the behold-
    ing of this Aethyr from afar is like the partaking of all the former Aethyrs.
         The Seer is lost in wonder, which is peace.
         And the ring of the horizon above her is a company of glorious
    Archangels with joined hands, that stand and sing: This is the daughter of
    BABALON the Beautiful, that she hath borne unto the Father of All. And
    unto all hath she borne her.
         This is the Daughter of the King. This is the Virgin of Eternity. This is
    she that the Holy One hath wrested from the Giant Time, and the prize of
    them that have overcome Space. This is she that is set upon the Throne of
160                                            Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


      Understanding. Holy, Holy, Holy is her name, not to be spoken among men.
      For Koré they have called her, and Malkah, and Betulah, and Persephone.


      And the poets have feigned songs about her, and the prophets have spoken
      vain things, and the young men have dreamed vain dreams; but this is she,
      that immaculate, the name of whose name may not be spoken. Thought
      cannot pierce the glory that defendeth her, for thought is smitten dead
      before her presence. Memory is blank, and in the most ancient books of
      Magick are neither words to conjure her, nor adorations to praise her. Will
      bends like a reed in the tempests that sweep the borders of her kingdom, and
      imagination cannot figure so much as one petal of the lilies whereon she
      standeth in the lake of crystal, in the sea of glass.
          This is she that hath bedecked her hair with seven stars the seven
      breaths of God that move and thrill its excellence. And she hath tired her
      hair with seven combs, whereupon are written the seven secret names of
      God that are not known even of the Angels, or of the Archangels, or of the
      Leader of the armies of the Lord.
          Holy, Holy, Holy art thou, and blessed be Thy name for ever, unto
      whom the Aeons are but the pulsings of thy blood."*


      And so we come to both the end and beginning of the trumps. I know that, for
many of you, the trip has been pretty bumpy in spots. Perhaps you think that you've
bitten off more than you can chew and that you will never completely understand
the tarot (especially the Thoth Tarot). You're right. You will never completely under-
stand. Nobody will. However, you do have the best teacher in the universe stand-
ing by to be your mentor and guide for all areas of your spiritual life—your Holy
Guardian Angel.
      Here, at the end of our discussion of Atu XX], on the lowest path on the Tree
of Life, it is especially appropriate that we remember our Holy Guardian Angel,
because, whether we are aware of it or not, whether we have achieved knowledge and
conversation of our HGA, or have just begun our initiatory journey, we are helped
at every step of the way.
      InThe Wake World, at the very beginning of Lola’s trip up the Tree of Life, she
is frightened when she and her fairy prince (HGA) first enter path 32, the path of
Tau and the Universe. Crowley describes how her Guardian Angel comforts her
and gives her the best advice anyone on the initiatory path can receive:


      Then he said: “Come on! This is only the Servants’ Hall, nearly everybody
      stays there all their lives.” And I said: “Kiss me!” So he said: “Every step you
      take is only possible when you say that.”
                      CHAPTER                   FIFTEEN

                                          C7)
                     THE MINOR ARCANA


     “Did the Tarot comefrom playing cards or didplaying cards comefrom the Tarot?”
     “Yes. "


As much as tarot fans would like to believe otherwise, modern playing cards did
not come from the tarot. As a matter of fact, where the fifty-six cards of the Lesser
Arcana are concemed,
                tarot came fromplaying cards. The game was called Mamluk,
and we can easily trace its existence and popularity to fifteenth-century Turkey.
    Mamluk cards had four suits, each numbered one through ten. The suits dis-
played images of polo sticks, cups, swords, and coins. Each suit also had a set of
three male royalty figures, a King,
                                  an Emir, and a Wazir.
                                                    The appearance of Mamluk
cards in Europe in the 1370s predates the earliest known tarot by at least fifty years.
    The revelation of Islamic roots of the Lesser Arcana gives ammunition to those
who would suggest Qabalistic roots to the tarot. Mamluk’s introduction to Europe
almost certainly came through Moorish Spain, which, at the time, was a hotbed of
Qabualistic activity. As I said concerning the Major Arcana, however, nothing can
be proven to suggest anything more occult or mysterious than the natural con-
gealing of the conventions of a popular game. Nevertheless, that phenomenon in itself
may have profound implications concerning how the huinan mind is hardwired to
respond to archetypal images.
                       CHAPTER                      SIXTEEN
                                             MIN
                                              Fry

                                  THE SPIRIT
                                OF THE ACES


     The Aces represent the roots ofthefour elements. They are quite above, and distinct
    Srom, the other small cards in the same way as Kether is said to be symbolized only by
     the topmost point ofthe Yod of
                                Tetragrammaton. In these cards is no real manifestation
     ofthe element in its materialform. Theyform a link between the small cards and the
     Princesses, who rule the Heavens around the North Pole... both in their appearance
     and in their meaning, the Aces are not the elements themselves, but the seeds ofthose
     elements."


You may think it odd that I begin my examination of the fifty-six cards of the Minor
Arcana by first examining the four aces instead of the court cards. After all, aren’t
the aces simply the first of the small cards? I hope I didn’t hear anyone ask that
question. To say the ace is just the lowest-numbered tarot small card of its suit is like
saying Kether is just the first sephira on the Tree of Life.
     Ultimately, there are not fifty-six cards in the Minor Arcana of the tarot. There
are only four—the four aces. The other fifty-two cards (the sixteen court cards and
the thirty-six small cards), live inside the four aces. As we learned in chapter 8, if
we look at the ace of any suit under a magic microscope, we first see the four court
cards of that suit living comfortably inside. Let's not stop there. If we increase the
magnification level of our microscope, we see that the nine small cards of the suit
are nestled neatly inside in three rows of three cards. Isn't that tidy?
    What does Crowley mean when he tells us that the aces are not the elements
themselves, but the seeds of those elements? Qabalistically, the most obvious answer
deals with the fact that Kether, the first sephira of the Tree of Life, is the inscrutable
singularity of its particular world. As head honcho of the supernal triad, it is above,
and distinct from, the other sephiroth that actually do all the manifesting in (and
The Spirit of the Aces                                                            163


                               a3)


                               (CARDINAL SIGNS _


                               L    FIXED SIGNS
                                    m


                                [2004   &

FiGure 26. THE SMALL CARDS EMBEDDED IN THE ACE. IN 10° INCREMENTS, THE 25, 3S, 4S
 REPRESENT THE CARDINAL ZODIAC SIGNS; THE 5S, 6S, 7S, REPRESENT THE FIXED ZODIAC
              SIGNS; THE 85, 9S, 108, REPRESENT THE MUTABLE ZODIAC SIGNS.


of) their respective worlds. Isn’t that explanation kind of a cop-out, however? It
sounds as if I’m just trying to explain something that is impossible to understand
by giving an example of something else that is impossible to understand.
     I didn’t start to grasp this “root-of-the-elements” concept until I learned that
physicists cannot properly define the nature of matter. They go as far as to tell us
that the components of atoms (subatomic particles like protons, electrons, neu-
trons, and other strange things like quarks, and charm and quark-gluon plasma)
arent matter at all, but can only be described as nonmaterial “tendencies.”
      What a perfect description of Kether! What a perfect description of the ace!
It is that supremely fundamental tendency underlying a particular element. The
Ace ofWands is not fire, but the tendency, or grouping of tendencies, to be fire and
the suit of Wands.
    Physicists theorize that these tendencies likely existed in their pure state in
nature under conditions of extreme heat such as might have existed in the first mil-
liseconds after the Big Bang. Accurately or inaccurately, the words these men and
women of science are currently tossing about to describe these premanifestation
tendencies that floated free in the immeasurable heat of creation are enough to
make mystics of all schools stand up and salute: words like dark matter, mana, ur-
matter, quintessence, and (are you ready for this?) spirit!”
     Tarot trump XX, the Aeon, represents the element of spirit. But, as we will
see, it also does double duty on the Tree of Life and in tarot by representing the
element fire. Perhaps this is the tarot’s way of pointing to spirit’s primordial home
in the fire of creation itself, and how the aces can be the root of their element yet,
as Crowley tells us, “quite above, and distinct from, the other small cards.”
164                                        Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


      As we know, each ace enjoys a unique and very important relationship with
the Princess of its suit. We touched on that relationship in chapters 8 and 11. The
Princess is the throne of her ace and, when we consider one, we must by necessity
think of the other. Hopefully, this connection will become clearer when we exam-
ine the court cards and small cards.
     In some card games, aces are considered just the cards that come before the
twos in value. In tarot, the aces are the gods of their suits and deserve some real
respect. Let’s take a look at them.
              CHAPTER                      SEVENTEEN
                                         iM 4 7

                                             42)


                        THE FOUR ACES


Do try & answer me about the Aces. Ifeel broady about them. I keep on thinking about
those 4 elements {3 their mightiness (9 Ifeel drowned in water, burnt withfire, cut by
the air (S dug into the earth. The airfeels to be the most solid & dead ofthem all,
which is odd, as it is supposed to be so light. No blood I suppose."
                                                  —Harris to Crowley, date uncertain.
166                                            Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


ACE OF WANDS

 ee
yaPa                            With the Princess of Wands as its throne, the Ace
                                of Wands rules the Cancer-Leo-Virgo Quadrant
                                above the North Pole, and the area of Asia.

                                Original Title: The Root of the Powers of Fire.

                                Golden Dawn Model: A hand appears from clouds
                                at the bottom of the card holding a three-branched
                                flaming club. Three flames issue from the ends of
                                the right and left branch, and four flames from the
                                top central branch. The whole is surrounded by
                                twenty-two red flames or Yods arranged as to sug-
                                gest the paths on the Tree of Life.

                                Color: Brilliance.


      This card represents the essence of the element of Fire it its inception. It is a
      solar-phallic outburst of flame from which spring lightnings in every direc-
      tion.”


If that was how Crowley described his vision of this card to Harris, then we will
have to admit that she did a magnificent job. The Golden Dawn model is more
complex than its description might suggest. Some renditions I've seen are almost com-
ical in their attempt to fulfill all the required images. Harris throws them all out
the window and gives us the image of a huge Tree of Life ablaze with ten flaming
sephiroth.
      In a very real way, this image is telling us that, just as all the sephiroth of all
four Trees of Life are only aspects of the one supreme Kether, just as all four Qabalistic
worlds are really only aspects of the highest world, just as the Hé and the Vau and
the final Hé ofYHVH are really only aspects of the Yod, all the cards of the Minor
Arcana ultimately live inside one card, the Ace of Wands.
      Of course, it takes a Buddha to actually grasp that concept. It also leaves us
with a pretty thin deck of tarot cards to play with. It’s probably better for us to go
along with the Qabalistic drill and view this card as representing Kether, of the Tree
of Life that represents the highest of the Qabalistic worlds, Atziluth. That's a heavy
enough concept as it is.
     This card is the masculine compliment of the Ace of Cups and is derived from
the Lingam and the Sun exactly as the Ace of Cups is from the Yoni and the Moon.'”
The Four Aces                                                                      167


ACE OF CUPS

With the Princess of Cups as its throne, the Ace of
Cups rules the Libra-Scorpio-Sagittarius quadrant
above the North Pole, and the area of the Pacific.

Original Title: The Root of the Powers of the
Waters.

Golden Dawn Model: A hand appears from clouds
at the bottom of the card supporting on its palm
the cup of the Stolistes from which gush fountams
of water. The Hebrew letter Hé is formed by the
spray of the fountain. The water falls on all sides
into a calm sea where lotuses and lilies grow.

Color: White Brilliance.


    This card represents the element of Water in its most secret and original
     form. It is the feminine complement of the Ace of Wands, and is derived
     from the Yoni and the Moon exactly as that is from the Lingam and the
     Sun.”


This card is a stunning and vivid image of the cosmic Yoni. In Wagnerian terms, it
is the Holy Grail to the Ace of Wands’ sacred lance. The Golden Dawn model has
more or less been discarded, and Crowley's description in The Book ofThoth is that
of an earlier draft of this card, not Harris’s finished product. This is, nonetheless,
one of, if not the, most beautiful cards in the entire deck.
     Scalloped radiations of light burst from the cup to meet and match the undu-
lating waves of water at the horizon of the sea. Harris repeats the motif of scallops
in the dress of the Princess of Cups, suggesting perhaps her relationship as throne
of the ace.
    The cup itself is a simple blue bow! with what appear to be two blue-green
entwined serpents serving as handles. For reasons that are not altogether clear to me,
Harris has placed three interlaced rings (the same as those that crowned the
Hierophant's wand in Atu V) on the front of the cup. This symbol, which Crowley
described as “representative of the three Aeons of Isis, Osiris and Horus with their
interlocking magical formulae”'” is not to be confused with the more complex Mark
of the Beast, which we find on the Ace of Disks and the Prince and Five of
                                                                         Wands.
One can only speculate why Harris was moved to apply this symbol to the cup.
168                                            Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


ACE OF SWORDS


        ‘     ut                above the North Pole and the area of the Americas.

                    7           Original Title: The Root of the Powers of the Air.

                                Golden Dawn Model: A hand appears from clouds
                                at the bottom of the card holding the hilt of a great
              )                 sword that penetrates at its point a radiant crown.
             mj             ~   An olive branch hangs from the right of the crown,
            s :             :   a palm branch from the left. Six Hebrew Vaus fall
             ar                 from the sword point upon the top of the crown.

                                Color: White Brilliance.


      The Ace of Swords is the primordial Energy of Air, the Essence of the Vau
      of the Tetragrammaton, the integration of the Ruach.'”

The Ace of Swords is the root of the element air and represents the Ruach. Ruach
is the intellect part of the soul, and (according to Eastern mystics) the mind is the
great enemy. The mind violently resists identification with any higher levels of con-
sciousness. Consequently, from out of the mind springs conflict, frustration, anxi-
ety, worry, and sorrow. Is it any wonder the suit of Swords is filled with so many
unpleasant cards? However, in the proper hands, the sword can be the weapon that
cuts through the crap, and the Ace of Swords is the sword of the Magus, “crowned
with the 22 rayed diadem of pure Light.”TM In Magick, Liber ABA, Book Four, Crowley
describes the sword. I can offer no better description of this card.

      The hilt of the Sword should be made of copper. The guard is composed of
      the two crescents of the waxing and the waning Moon—back to back.
      Spheres are placed between them, forming an equilateral triangle with the
      sphere of the pommel. The blade is straight, pointed, and sharp right up to
      the guard. It is made of steel to equilibrate with the hilt, for steel is the metal
      of Mars, as copper is of Venus. .. . The hilt is Venus, for Love is the motive
      of this ruthless analysis—if this were not so the Sword would be a Black
      Magical weapon. The pommel of the Sword is in Daath, the guard extends
      to Chesed and Geburah; the point is in Malkuth.'®

Upon the blade, Harris has engraved, in Greek, the word Thelema (Will) in Arabic
Damascened work.
The Four Aces                                                                         169


ACE OF DISKS

With the Princess of Disks as its throne, the Ace of
Disks rules the Aries-Taurus-Gemini quadrant
above the North Pole, and the area of Europe and
Africa.

Original Title: The Root of the Powers of the
Earth.

Golden Dawn Model: A hand appears from clouds
at the bottom of the card holding the branch of a
rose tree surmounted bya large disk composed of
five concentric circles. The center is white, is
adorned with a red Greek cross, and radiates twelve
white rays that reach to the inner edge of the disk.
Above this is a circled Maltese Cross with two
white wings.

Color: White, flecked Gold.


     Steal not this Book for fear of shame!
     The Ace of Disks—the Author’s name.'®


To represent the root of the element earth and the material world Assiah, Lady Harris
gives us the ultimate coin of the realm centered upon money-green layers of the veg-
etal embellishments that historically have adorned the world’s paper currency.
    A tarot tradition dating back to sixteenth-century Italy (where decks of cards
were stamped and taxed by local authorities) dictates that the creator of the deck place
his or her mark or signature on the Two or the Ace of Disks. Crowley was obvi-
ously aware of this tradition, and I think we can be confident that he supervised its
execution very carefully. The Ace of Disks is nothing less than Crowley’s own mag-
ical signature. His motto, TO META @HEPION To Mega Therion, Greek for the
Great Beast, is displayed on the perimeter of the disk, and his personal seal is placed
in the very center of all.
     A decagon fits snugly within the outer ring and seems to create ten facets that
reach toward the center and curiously end at the points of two five-sided polygons.
Within the two polygons is a heptagram (Thelema’s Star of Babalon), and within
the heptagram we find the Mark of the Beast.
    The Mark of the Beast is made up of three intersecting circles. The uppermost
circle contains a dot at its center, creating the astrological symbol of the Sun. Cradling
170                                          Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


the Sun circle from below is an upturned crescent Moon. Together, they are the
Sun and Moon conjoined, the symbol of so many things that 1 would be an idiot
to even start a footnote. The number 666, the number of the Sun and of the Beast
is written across the two lower circles. This symbol is rich in magical and Qabalistic
symbolism. One can also, with very little imagination, see a bird's-eye view of the
three main characters of male genitalia. Perfect Crowley!
                    CHAPTER                     EIGHTEEN

                                            CA)
         THE CRAZY MIXED-UP WORLD
                          OF COURT CARDS


     The convenience ofthese arrangements is that these cards are suitable as being
    descriptive, in a rough and empiricalfashion, ofdivers types ofmen and women. One
    may say briefly that any ofthese cards is a picture ofthe person whose Sun, or whose
    rising sign at bis nativity,falls within the Zodiacal attribution ofthe card.'”


We tend to treat the four aces as if they were each the pure representatives of their
element. That is not altogether correct. It is true that they are the purest represen-
tatives of their element, but, if they did not contain some minute quantities (and qual-
ities) of the other three elements, they would be unable to combine to form the
matter and energy that creates and sustains the phenomenal universe. Simply put,
there would be no creation at all if the individual elements remained pure and set
completely apart from one another. Water would not be able to combine with air
if it didn’t have a bit of air already in it to serve as an attractor, and vice versa. In
order to manifest a universe, things have to be shaken up. The court cards make
four very mixed-up families.


MIX-UP #1: SIXTEEN SUBELEMENTS

Remember that, when we put an ace under our magick microscope, we saw the
four court cards of the suit living inside? As the four aces represent the four ele-
ments of fire, water, air, and earth, the four court cards in each suit represent the
same four elements in subdivisions of their suit. The Knights are the fire subdivi-
sion; the Queens are the water subdivision; the Princes are the air subdivision; and
the Princesses are the earth subdivision. This gives us sixteen members of the court-
172                                          Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


card family and sixteen subelemental characteristics that Crowley identifies as types
of human beings.
      Modern tarot scholars, in particular Linda Gail Walters,'® have done a remark-
able job of applying the Jungian personality types as defined by the famous Myers-
Briggs type indicators’ to the sixteen court cards. So has psychologist Arthur
Rosengarten, who, in his groundbreaking text, Psychology and Tarot,TM discusses
these same parallels. 1 firmly believe that, had the Myers-Briggs concepts been
available to Crowley at the time of his writing The Book of Thoth, he would most
certainly have referred to them, because they bolster his own theories concerning
the personality characteristics of the court cards.
      Just as each of our personalities has been molded by an elaborate mixture of
factors, including genetics, environment, education, and experience, so each court
card is a complex mixture of elemental, planetary, and zodiacal factors. When con-
sidering what follows, keep in mind that it is the duty of the elements to “mix” (see
tables 14 and 15).


MIX-UP #2: PRINCESSES—QUADRANTS OF SPACE—
NOT QUADRANTS OF TIME
The Princesses are the earth subelement of their suits and enjoy a special relation-
ship with their aces. For this reason, they are considered separately from the rest of
their families. They and their aces rule quadrants of space (see chapter 11).
      The Ace/Princess of
                        Wands rules the celestial quadrant of Cancer/Leo/Virgo
and the area of Asia; Ace/Princess of Cups rules Libra/Scorpio/Sagittarius and the
Pacific, Ace/Princess of Swords rules Capricorn/Aquarius/Pisces and the area of
the Americas; and the Ace/Princess of Disks rules Aries/Taurus/Gemini and the
areas of Europe and Africa.


MIX-UP #3: KNIGHTS, QUEENS, PRINCES—
QUADRANTS OF TIME
Each Knight, Queen, and Prince rule 30° of the zodiacal year. Chauvinistic logic
would suggest that the Knights should predominate in cardinal signs, Queens in
fixed signs, and Princes in mutable signs of the zodiac—but chauvinistic logic would
be wrong!
      To mix things up, the knights dominate the mutable signs: (Knight of Wands,
Sagittarius; Knight of Cups, Pisces; Knight of Swords, Gemini; Knight of Disks,
Virgo). It is the queens who dominate the cardinal signs: (Queen of Wands, Aries;
Queen of Cups, Cancer; Queen of Swords, Libra; Queen of Disks, Capricorn).
The princes dominate the fixed signs: (Prince of Wands, Leo; Prince of Cups,
Scorpio; Prince of Swords, Aquarius; Prince of Disks, Taurus). Very mixed up.
The Crazy Mixed-up World of Court Cards                                               173


MIX-UP #4: KNIGHTS, QUEENS, PRINCES—THE
ADOPT-A-NEIGHBOR’S-DECAN PROGRAM
The mixing up doesn’t end here. You will notice that I used the words “predominate”
and “dominate,” rather than “rule.” That is because each of these twelve court cards
isn't allowed to completely rule any of the signs of the zodiac; it can only mostly
rule a sign of the zodiac. To be precise, each court card rules from 20° of one sign
to 20° of the next (see table 14). Even though the Knight of Wands dominates the
first 20° (or ?/s) of the mutable fire sign, Sagittarius, he is also forced by the admix-
ture law of the tarot to back up a bit on the zodiac belt and adopt the last decan
(period of 10°) of the sign that preceeds Sagittarius. This means the fiery Knight
of Wands has to adopt the last decan of the fixed water sign, Scorpio.
    The Queen of Cups dominates the first 20° of the cardinal sign Cancer, but she
also has to play hostess to (and be colored by) the last 10° of the mutable sign
Gemini. This is how the Knights, Queens, and Princes literally knit the zodiacal year
together.
     Planets are also assigned to each 10° division (decan) of the zodiac and fur-
ther influence the character of these twelve court cards, but I will talk about the
planets in chapter 19.


NOW I’M MIXED UP
I know this might at first appear rather complicated and beyond the scope of inter-
est of many of you. If that is the case, 1 commend you for your patience and will-
ingness to wade through this technical discussion of the complexities of the court
cards. Please take comfort in the knowledge that, for the moment, it is not as impor-
tant for you to completely master all these details as it is for you realize that, if you
really wanted to, you could master them.
     So, as a reward for your forbearance, I’m going to share with youa little short-
cut to understanding the court cards and making them immediately usable in a
tarot reading. It starts with Crowley's quote that I used to head this chapter:

    The convenience of these arrangements is that these cards are suitable as
    being descriptive, in a rough and empirical fashion, of divers types of men
    and women. One may say briefly that any of these cards is a picture of the
    person whose Sun, or whose rising sign at his nativity, falls within the
    Zodiacal attribution of the card.


    The characteristics of people are a lot easier to remember and understand than
the theoretical characteristics of Qabalistic and astrological abstractions. It is enough
to remember that each Knight, each Queen, and each Prince is somebody's birth-
day card. Start with yourself. What court card are you? Do my comments describe
174                                             Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


you? Do Crowley's? If not, feel free to disregard them and give that card your own
definition, based on what you know about yourself.
      Next, learn the birthdays of people you know—family members, friends, co-
workers, enemies, even celebrities or historical characters about whom you know a
great deal. Using their date of birth, determine which court cards they are. Chances
are that the character traits you and the others exhibit are very similar to the clas-
sic descriptions of the cards. What if they are not, however? Hey! Maybe the cards
are wrong. After all, people are real characters in a real world; tarot cards are just pieces
of painted paper in a box.
      To prime the pump for this kind of meditation, I have, in discussing the court
cards, included the names of a few stereotypical celebrities and historical person-
ages whose birth dates make them a Knight, Queen, or Prince of the appropriate
suit. I realize only too well that these digressions smack of pop-culture dilettan-
tism, and represent a shocking breach of my vow to keep things as “Crowley” as
possible. To all the Crowley purists who are affronted by this un-Crowley offering,
I offer my sincere apology. To everyone else—have fun.
The Crazy Mixed-up World ofCourt Cards                                                 175


KNIGHT OF WANDS
Fire oF Fire

20° Scorpio to 20° Sagittarius

November 13 to December 12

Rules 7 of Cups; 8 of Wands; 9 of Wands

Original Titles: The Lord of the Flame and the
Lightning; The King of the Spirits of Fire King of
the Salamanders.

Crest: Winged black horse’s head.

Symbols: Black horse, waving flames. Club. Scarlet
gold cloak.

Hair: Red-gold.

Eyes: Grey or Hazel.


     The moral qualities appropriate to this figure are activity, generosity, fierce-
     ness, impetuosity, pride, impulsiveness, swiftness in unpredictable actions. If
    wrongly energized, he is evil-minded, cruel, bigoted and brutal. He is in
     either case ill-fitted to carry on his action; he has no means of modifying it
     according to circumstances. If he fails in his first effort, he has no resource.”


Representing fire of fire, the Knight of Wands certainly has the potential of being
the strongest member of the court cards. He represents the Yod subdivision of the
Yod (of YHVH.) However, it is well for us to remember that, where court cards
are concerned, representing something is not the same as being something.
     Harris translates the Golden Dawn description into a magnificent and thrilling
image that almost leaps off the card. Did I say leap? Explodes is perhaps a better word.
The forward thrust of the horse’s mane and tail and the hair and beard of the Knight
suggests that they aren't
                       so much in the act of jumping
                                                as being blown from behind by
some unimaginably strong explosive force. It is the portrait of someone who is riding
a rocket,
      and that can be very risky. If the rocket
                                             isn’t aimed properly, he or she misses
the target. If there is not enough fuel, he or she crashes. If there is too much fuel, the
person explodes. But if everything goes well, it is the most spectacular of successes.
     Robert Fulton, Indira Gandhi, Robert Kennedy, Frank Sinatra, and Mary
Queen of Scots all were Knights of Wands.
    Fiery reds, yellows, and gold dominate this card as they do all the Wand court cards.
176                                                Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


QUEEN OF WANDS
Water oF Fire

~~             ,
            Niie                      20° Pisces to 20° Aries
Z
                  i     wa
                   we


          ae
              5 ffY March 11 to April 10
\sbiiN Original Titles: The Que n ofthe Thrones of
                                      Rules 10 of Cups; 2 of Wands; 3 of Wands


                                      Flame; Queen of the Salamanders.


                             N\\‘| heavy
                                   Symbolheads: Leopard.  Steady flames. Wand with
                                   ‘Crest: Winged leopard.


                                                  or end.
        WW \i ||              \)      Hair: Red-gold.
                                      Eyes: Blue or Brown.


      The Characteristics of the Queen are adaptability, persistent energy, calm
      authority which she knows how to use to enhance her attractiveness. She is
      kindly and generous, but impatient of opposition. She has immense capacity
      for friendship and for love, but always on her own initiative.


The top portion of the card projects such a powerful image of supreme feminine
strength and nobility that one could easily see it chiseled in stone as the facade of
a great public building or monument. Unfortunately, beautiful as she is, she is some-
what of a facade herself. Crowley goes so far as to suggest she is somewhat of a
snob.
      When H. Rider Haggard wrote the classic science fiction story She, he must
have had the Queen of Wands in mind. The title character is Ayesha, a beautiful,
immortal queen who rules a land where she is known as “She Who Must Be
Obeyed.” She is a just but ruthless queen who seems to take offense quite easily.
She loves her people (in a selfish sort of way), but she is so self-absorbed that, when
the opportunity for her to experience true love presents itself, she becomes a cruel,
tyrannical, savage monster. This, naturally, results in her unhappiness and eventual
destruction. Describing the character represented by this card, Crowley uses a won-
derful expression, “when she misses her bite, she breaks her jaw!”TM
      But that's the downside of this lovely lady. She also can be everything the world
needs in a strong woman.
The Crazy Mixed-up Worldof Court Cards                                          17


    Actress Ursula Andress, who portrayed Queen Ayesha in the 1965 film She,
is a Queen ofWands. So was Joan Crawford (a real-life She Who Must Be Obeyed).
Two other Queens ofWands (whose laws we obey) were Albert Einstein and Wyatt
Earp (although, I probably wouldn't have told Wyatt Earp he was the Queen of
anything.)
    Fiery reds, yellows, and gold dominate this card, as they do all the Wand court
cards.
178                                             Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


PRINCE OF WANDS
AIR OF Fire

                                20° Cancer to 20° Leo

                               July 12 to August 11

                                Rules 4 of Cups; 5 of Wands; 6 of Wands

                                Original Titles: The Prince of the Chariot of Fire;
                                Prince and Emperor of the Salamanders.

                                Crest: Winged lion's head.

                                Symbols: Wand and salient flames. Fire wand of
                                Zelator Adeptus Minor.

                                Hair: Yellow.

                                Eyes: Blue Grey.


      He is romantic especially in matters of history and tradition, to the point of
      folly, and may engineer “stunts” or play elaborate practical jokes.


The Ascendant (or the rising sign) in one’s astrological natal chart is second only
to the Sun sign in importance. Among other things, it represents the native's per-
sonality and how they appear to others in the world. Crowley's Ascendant was 3°
Leo; consequently, he identified strongly with Leo and with the Prince of Wands,
who rules 20° Cancer to 20° Leo.
      This card is Crowley's idealized image of himself. First of all, we find his per-
sonal seal, the Mark of the Beast, emblazoned upon the breast of the Prince. This
device appears in only two other places in the Thoth Tarot—on the Five ofWands
(which represents 0° to 10° Leo), and the Ace of Disks, which, by tradition, is the
signature card of the deck’s creator. The Prince is even seated in Crowley's favorite
yogic posture, the Thunderbolt asana.TM Crowley, because he felt he knew himself
so well, has a great deal to say about the moral qualities and intellectual paradoxes
of this card:


      He is often violent, especially in the expression of an opinion, but he does
      not necessarily hold the opinion about which he is so emphatic. . . . His
      character is intensely noble and generous. He may be an extravagant boaster,
      while slyly laughing both at the object of his boast and at himself for making
The Crazy Mixed-up World ofCourt Cards                                          179


    it... . His courage is fanatically strong, and his endurance indefatigable. He
    is always fighting against odds, and always wins in the long—the very
    long—run.””


    While Crowley identifies with this card because of his rising sign, it also
describes a few other notables whose Sun sign makes them Princes of Wands: Julius
Caesar, John Dee, Nelson Mandela, Mick Jagger, Jacqueline Kennedy, Madam
Blavatsky, and Christopher Hyatt.
    Fiery reds, yellows, and gold dominate this card, as they do all the Wand court
cards.
180                                              Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


PRINCESS OF WANDS
EARTH OF FIRE

      “e Pr          ~<a           Together with the Ace of Wands, rules the
        4        >        ©        Cancer/Leo/Virgo celestial quadrant above the
             “            .        North Pole and the area of Asia.
                                   Original Titles: The Princess of the Shining Flame;
                                   The Rose of the Palace of Fire; Princess and
                              __   Empress of the Salamanders. Throne of the Ace of
                      5
                      +            Wands.
                                   Crest: Tiger's head.
                  Y)
                                   Symbols: Tiger, leaping flames. Gold Altar, long
                 Keay / |          club, largest at bottom.

            ©                      Hair: Red-gold.
                                   Eyes: Blue.


      ] am a bit worried. The princess is behaving most queer! She won't have any
      nice tidy lines & I really don’t know if she will be alright. She is certainly no
      relation of the first sample submitted. I think when I have smacked her, I
      shall have to post her to you, & you can tear her up or retain her as she
      strikes you. Oh dear I am tired. | have battled with her blaring wriggles till
      the eye falls out & she has burnt my throat & I can’t swallow.
                                                   —Harris to Crowley, date uncertain.


The Princesses share a special status among the court cards, and Harris seems to have
given all four of them the special attention they deserve. They are all breathtak-
ingly beautiful. Placed side by side, they are the four pin-up girls of the Thoth Tarot.
The Princess of Wands is especially stunning, and is one more reason the Crowley-
Harris deck is banned contraband within so many prisons. Crowley wrote, “This card
may be said to represent the dance of the virgin priestess of the Lords of Fire.”
      As the earth subelement of the suit of fire, she not only ofÏciates before the
ram’s-headed altar as Princess of the flaming sacrifice, but is herself the fuel of the
fire. We recognize her in people we meet who are so energetically self-assured, so
independent and irrationally audacious that, while inspirational and thrilling, they
can be downright dangerous to be around.
      When ill-dignified, she is the ultimate drama queen, who is so shallow and
self-absorbed that it never occurs to her that nobody is sympathizing with her. If left
The Crazy Mixed-up World of Court Cards                                             181


unchecked, the Princess of Wands gone bad will not only incinerate herself need-
lessly, in doing so she will also set fire to the whole neighborhood. She can be “cruel,
unreliable, faithless and domineering.””° Know anyone like that?
      Princesses do not rule degrees of the zodiacal year, so we have no examples of
celebrated personalities who are/were Princesses of Wands.
     Fiery reds, yellows, and gold dominate this card, as they do all the Wand court
cards.
182                                            Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


KNIGHT OF CUPS
Fire oF WATER

                                20° Aquarius to 20° Pisces

                                February 9 to March 10

                                Rules 7 of Swords; 8 of Cups; 9 of Cups

                                Original Titles: Lord of the Waves and the Waters;
                                The King of the Hosts of the Sea; King of Nymphs
                                or Undines.

                                Crest: Peacock with open wings.

                                Symbols: White horse, crab issuing from cup. Sea.

                                Hair: Fair.

                                Eyes: Blue.


      Swiftness and violence ill suit a character naturally placid; it is rare indeed to
      meet a person who has succeeded in harmonizing these conflicting
      elements.”


I’ve got to be careful with this one. Both my wife and son are the Knights of Cups.
Of course, none of the negative qualities of this card pertain to either of them.
    Leaping out of the card in the opposite direction than that of the Knight of
Wands, the Knight of Cups is a cool contrast to his brother. Fire of water brings to
mind water in action—a pelting rain, a gushing spring—and the more patient
actions whereby water erodes and dissolves things.
      Like most of the court cards, Harris's version respectfully contains all the major
features of the Golden Dawn model, including a most beautiful and subtle pea-
cock that seems to be fashioned from a plume of pure water created by the wake
of the Knight’s movement.
      I think Crowley rather liked this fellow, and after all, what's not to like? “He
is amiable in a passive way. He is quick to respond to attraction, and easily becomes
enthusiastic under such stimulus; but he is not very enduring.”?”?
    We can probably blame the influence of mutable Pisces for throwing her wet
blanket on the white horse of our otherwise fiery lord of the waves and the waters.
This makes the Knight of Cups a pretty nice guy. He’s just not very deep. In fact,
the worst name we can call him is “shallow water.” He has a natural innocence and
The Crazy Mixed-up World ofCourt Cards                                           183


purity that make him likeable, but he’s often just not deep enough for those virtues
to easily manifest as profound nobility of character. As Crowley says, “His name is
writ in water.”?"
    While this may be somewhat true for natives such as Sonny Bono, Mia Farrow,
and Burt Reynolds, there must also be something in the character of this card that
engenders the likes of George Washington, Abraham Lincoln, Susan B. Anthony,
and Thomas Edison.
    Cool blues and blue-greens dominate this card, as they do the other Cups court
cards.
184                                            Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


QUEEN OF CUPS
WATER OF WATER

                                20° Gemini to 20° Cancer

                                June 11 to July 11

                                 Rules 10 of Swords; 2 of Cups; 3 of Cups

                                Original Titles: The Queen of the Thrones of
                                Water; Queen of the Nymphs or Undines.

                                Crest: Ibis

                                 Symbols: Crayfish issuing from River.

                                 Hair: Gold-brown.

                                 Eyes: Blue.


      Her image is of extreme purity and beauty, with infinite subtlety; to see the
      Truth of her is hardly possible, for she reflects the nature of the observer in
      great perfection.’


The Queen of Cups is my birthday court card, so please be warned that the objec-
tivity of my comments may be obscured by clouds of narcissism, but honestly, who
am I to argue with Crowley?
      Harris's Queen of Cups bears striking similarities to Atu II, the High Priestess.
As a matter of fact, if you were to trim the borders of the two cards and place the
Queen of Cups upside down above the High Priestess, you would see that they
match in a dizzying display of synthetic projective geometry. Both cards present
the image of a great cup, the stem of which is formed by the body of a goddesss. Atu
II is the cup of the virginal goddess of the Moon; the Queen of Cups is that of the
great mother goddess.
      Water of water is tantamount to saying reflection of reflection, or mirror to
mirror.The Queen of Cups is popular and makes friends easily because, when others
look at her, they see only themselves. Crowleys tells us that “She is the perfect agent
and patient, able to receive and transmit everything without herself being affected
thereby.””"* To liberals, she looks like a liberal; to conservatives, she looks like a con-
servative, when in truth she may be neither. If ill dignified, she can be dangerous and
The Crazy Mixed-up World ofCourt Cards                                         185


cruel, distorting the reflections she casts back on her unsuspecting victims, who
then see only monsters in the mirror.
    My fellow Queens of Cups include Paul McCartney, Jacques Cousteau, John
D. Rockefeller, Nikola Tesla, George Orwell, and Gerald Gardner.
    Cool blues and blue-greens dominate this card, as they do the other Cups court
cards.
186                                              Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


PRINCE OF CUPS
Arr OF WATER

                                 20° Libra to 20° Scorpio

                                  October 13 to November 12

                                  Rules 4 of Swords; 5 of Cups; 6 of Cups

                                 Original Titles: The Prince of the Chariot of the
                                 Waters: Prince and Emperor of the Nymphs or
                                  Undines.

                                 Crest: Eagle.

                                  Symbols: Scorpion, eagle-serpent issuing from lake.

                                  Hair: Brown.

                                  Eyes: Grey or Brown.


      The moral characteristics of the person pictured in this card are subtlety,
      secret violence, and craft. He is intensely secret, an artist in all his ways. . . .
      He is in fact perfectly ruthless.”


With style worthy of a comic book cover, Harris's Prince of Cups makes a spec-
tacular entrance by bursting straight at us from a crashing wave, his chariot drawn
by an enormous black eagle. His left hand grasps a cup out of which rises a coiled
a snake. In his right hand, he holds an enormous lotus blossom.
      I have to believe that    Crowley had an unpleasant experience with a Prince of
Cups. If everyone born between October 13 and November 12 manifested all the
dark and chilling qualities Crowley ascribes to this card, then '/.2 of the population
of the planet would be melodrama villains. While that may have been true of Princes
of Cups Lee Harvey Oswald and Leon Trotsky, there is still great strength and
potential in this card.
      Libra passing over to Scorpio is a very strong moment, but the active charac-
teristics of air in the passive environment of water makes an uneasy combination.
Like foaming bubbles exploding from an underchilled bottle of champagne, these
two elements do not care if they ruin the party or the furniture; they just want to
get out and away from each other. Maybe that is why Crowley describes the Prince
of Cups as “completely without conscience in the ordinary sense of the word, and
is therefore usually distrusted by his neighbors.””"
The Crazy Mixed-up World ofCourt Cards                                         187


     ’ve known several Princes of Cups, including my father, and I must say they
were indeed men of immense abilities who could not be, as Crowley noted, “relied
upon to work in harness.””” The same could be said of fellow Princes Martin Luther,
Oscar Wilde, Friedrich Nietzsche, Timothy Leary, and Pablo Picasso.
    Cool blues and blue-greens dominate this card, as they do the other Cups court
cards.
188                                            Understanding Aletster Crowley's Thoth Tarot


PRINCESS OF CUPS
EARTH OF WATER

                                ‘Together with the Ace of Cups, rules the
                                Libra/Scorpio/Sagittarius celestial quadrant above
                                the North Pole, and the area of the Pacific.

                                Original Titles: The Princess of the Waters; Lotus
                                of the Palace of the Floods; Princess and Empress
                                of the Nymphs or Undines. Throne of the Ace of
                                Cups.

                                Crest: Swan.

                                Symbols: Dolphin, Lotus. Sea with spray, turtle
                                from cup.

                                Hair: Brown.

                                Eyes: Blue or Brown.


      The character of the Princess is infinitely gracious. All sweetness, all volup-
      tuousness, gentleness, kindness and tenderness are in her character. She lives
      in the world of Romance, in the perpetual dream of rapture.”


I cannot overemphasize the importance of the relationship between the ace of each
suit and its Princess. The ace may be beautiful to look at, but, because it is the root—
the hidden germ—of its suit and element, it is impossible to understand. The
Princess, on the other hand, represents the end product, the crystallization and
materialization of what was purely potential in the ace. In the language of religion,
the ace may be worshipped, but the Princess can be adored. That being so, it would
not be inappropriate for the herald of this card to cry out, “All fall down before
Princess of the Waters; Lotus of the Palace of the Floods; Throne of the Holy
Grail!” You my think I’m laying it on a bit thick for this young lady, but I assure
you, not half as thick as Mr. Crowley did. She’s not all dreams, either. As earth of
water, she literally can ground vaporous and romantic ideas into manifestation, and
provide a fixed and fertile medium where the water-nourished life of ideas can
flourish.
     Harris's image is one of graceful fluid movement. The water is alive with large
smooth waves that suggest the heavy environment of ocean's depth. The Princess
is dancing, her eyes closed, her head thrown back, an expression of pure rapture on
her face reminiscent of Bernini's The Ecstasy of Saint Theresa. The scallops of her
The Crazy Mixed-up World ofCourt Cards                                         189


dress are the same motif found on the Ace of Cups, and the hem is adomed with
clear water crystals.
    Princesses do not rule degrees of the zodiacal year, so we have no examples of
celebrated personalities who are/were Princesses of Cups.
    Cool blues and blue-greens dominate this card, as they do the other Cups court
cards.
190                                         Understanding Aleister Crowley’s Thoth Tarot


KNIGHT OF SWORDS
Fire oF AIR

                              20° Taurus to 20° Gemini

                              May 11 to June 10

                              Rules 7 of Disks; 8 of Swords; 9 of Swords

            ye        eee     Original Titles: The Lord of the Winds and
        7        iy           Breezes; King of the Spirits of Air; King of the
                 by           Sylphs and Sylphides.
            y ; yi            Crest: Winged Hexagram.
                              Symbols: Winged brown horse, driving clouds,
                              drawn brown sword.

                              Hair: Dark Brown.

                              Eyes: Dark.


      I have done as you suggested to the Swords. Thank you Mr Crowley. You
      were quite right.”?!
                                              —Harris to Crowley, date uncertain.


Swords are the suit of air and, as we begin our examination of these cards, I must
point out a design motif that appears repeatedly in all the cards of this suit—wings.
Lady Harris incorporates angular and highly stylized wings everywhere! They may
not always look like wings, but that is what they are.
      Beginning with the Knight of Swords, we see that what appear at first to be
four propeller blades spinning atop his pointed helmet are actually four triangu-
lar wings sprouting from his back. They are transparent and veined, like those of
a dragonfly. Perhaps there are only two wings that are moving so fast they appear
as four. Please take a moment and look at the Queen, Prince, and Princess of
Swords, and locate the marvelous angular wings on these figures. Now look at all
the small cards of the suit and see the backgrounds festooned with these stylized
wings—some balanced, almost pinwheel in form; some twisted, broken, stretched,
and distorted.
      It has been suggested that these figures represent magical sigils drawn from
planetary kameas, or magical squares. Anyone familiar with the extent (or should
I say the limits) of Lady Harris's magical education at the time would not even sug-
gest such a thing.
The Crazy Mixed-up World of Court Cards                                            191


    The Knight of Swords is fire of air, suggestive of a violent wind. The general
divinatory meaning of the card can be summed up in one word—attack. “The moral
qualities of person thus indicated,” Crowley warned, “are activity and skill, subtlety
and cleverness. He is fierce, delicate and courageous but altogether the prey of his
idea, which comes to him as an inspiration without reflection.”
    Famous Knights of Swords include Baron Miinchhausen, Arthur Conan Doyle,
Pope John Paul II, Malcolm X, Queen Victoria, John Wayne, John F. Kennedy,
Marilyn Monroe, and Cher.
    Sky blues, yellows, and white cirrus clouds dominate this card, as they do the
Queen of Swords.
192                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


QUEEN OF SWORDS
WATER OF AIR

                                20° Virgo to 20° Libra

                                September 12 to October 12

                                Rules 10 of Disks; 2 of Swords; 3 of Swords

                                Original Titles: The Queen of the Thrones of Air;
                                Queen of the Sylphs and Sylphides.

                                Crest: Winged child's head.

                                Symbols: Head of man severed. Cumulous clouds.
                                Drawn sword.

                                Hair: Grey.

                                Eyes: Light Brown.


      The person symbolized by this card should be intensely perceptive, a keen
      observer, a subtle interpreter, and intense individualist, swift and accurate at
      recording ideas; in action confident, in spirit gracious and just.”


This card represents Crowley’s Sun sign and so, naturally, it is the most intimidat-
ing card in the deck. One look at this lady tells us she means business. Water of air
is suggestive of clouds that promise either life-giving rain or the threat of a tor-
rential cloudburst. She holds the severed head of a bearded man in her left hand
and the sword that probably did the job in her right. One may think this grisly
touch is just another gruesome Crowleyism. It is not. This image is the classic
Golden Dawn description of the Queen of Swords, and makes a fundamental
Qabalistic statement.
      The suit of Swords represents Yetzirah, the formative world—the mind's eye
of deity. Swords’ and Yetzirah’s counterpart in the human soul is the Ruach, the
intellect, which is centered in the brain—the human head. Using the sword of dis-
cretion and reason, the Queen has separated the higher faculties of the intellect
from the influences of the lower nature (the Nephesh, the animal soul). She is quite
literally, Crowley points out, the “Liberator of the Mind.”TM The head is that of a
bearded man (the Hermit of Virgo perhaps?), the eyes closed peacefully, the face sug-
gesting the trance of deep meditation.
     The influence of Virgo moving into Libra gives the Queen of Swords the prac-
ticality and grace of a great monarch. This native “should be intensely perceptive,
The Crazy Mixed-up World ofCourt Cards                                             193


a keen observer, a subtle interpreter, an intense individualist, swift and accurate at
recording ideas; in action confident, in spirit gracious and just. Her movements will
be graceful, and her ability in dancing and balancing exceptional.” If ill-digni-
fied, she can be as cruel and dangerous as she looks.
    Crowley’s fellow Queens of Swords include Mahatma Gandhi, Eleanor
Roosevelt, H. G. Wells, and Stephen King.
    Sky blues, yellows, and white cumulus clouds dominate this card.
194                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


PRINCE OF SWORDS
AIR OF AIR

                                20° Capricorn to 20° Aquarius

                               January 10 to February 8

                                Rules 4 of Disks; 5 of Swords; 6 of Swords

                                Original Titles: The Prince of the Chariot of the
                               Winds; Prince and Emperor of Sylphs and
                                Sylphides.

                                Crest: Winged angel’s head.

                                Symbols: Arch Fairies winged. Dark clouds, nimbi,
                                drawn swords.

                                Hair: Grey.

                                Eyes: Dark.


      It is easy to be deceived by such people; for the manifestation itself has enor-
      mous potency: it is as if an imbecile offered one the dialogues of Plato. They
      may in this way acquire a great reputation both for depth and breadth of
      mind.”


An earlier version of this card paints a kinder, gentler picture of the Prince of Swords
and the arch fairies who draw his chariot. The final version is full of mad, seem-
ingly futile movement. The geometrical wings of the Prince and the children are
enclosed in bright yellow bubbles—air of air. The children pull the chariot “irre-
sponsibly in any direction that takes their fancy; they are not reined, but perfectly
capricious. The chariot consequently is easy enough to move, but quite unable to
progress in any definite direction except by accident. This is a perfect picture of the
Mind.”»”
      Like a madman whose brain creates only to destroy, we see the Prince with the
sword in his right hand, with which he creates ideas and images, and the sickle in
his left hand, with which he immediately cuts them down. This sounds like mad-
ness, but we are doing the same thing every moment of our waking lives. When
the mind is given a creative outlet for this process, such as music, literature, or film
making, we discover great genius. Mozart and Mendelssohn were Princes of Swords,
as were the great film directors D. W. GrifÏth and Federico Fellini, and the vision-
ary Emmanuel Swedenborg.
The Crazy Mixed-up World ofCourt Cards                                            195


     Crowley heaps great praise upon the pure intelligence of the Prince of Swords,
but he cannot avoid discussing the futility of thinking about thinking. “He is full of
ideas and designs which tumble over each other,”he points out. “He is a mass ofine
ideal unrelated to practical effort.”
     The great actor James Dean was a Prince of Swords, and while Jim Stark (the
character  he played so brilliantlyin the film Rebel withouta Cause) was fictitious,
Dean nonetheless gave profound life to that role. In my mind, it was the perfect
tortured portrayal of the frustrations inherent in this card—a performance that I
believe, in all likelihood, would have been appreciated by fellow Prince of Swords,
Edgar Allan Poe.
    Clouds of sharp white ice crystals, yellows, and metallic greens dominate this
card.
196                                            Understanding Aleister Crowley’ Thoth Tarot


PRINCESS OF SWORDS
EARTH OF AIR

                                Together with the Ace of Swords, rules the
                                Capricorn/Aquarius/Pisces celestial quadrant above
                                the North Pole, and the area of Americas.

                                Onginal Titles: The Princess of the Rushing
                                Winds; The Lotus of the Palace of Air; Princess
                                and Empress of the Sylphs and Sylphides. Throne
                                of the Ace of Swords.

                                Crest: Medusa’s head.

                                Symbols: Silver altar, smoke. Cirrus clouds. Drawn
                                brown sword.

                                Hair: Light Brown.

                                Eyes: Blue.


      The character of the Princess is stern and revengeful. Her logic is destruc-
      tive. She is firm and aggressive, with great practical wisdom and subtlety in
      material things. She shews great cleverness and dexterity in the management
      of practical affairs, especially where they are of a controversial nature. She is
      very adroit in the settlement of controversies.”


Rising out of a cloud of dust, Crowley’s paradoxical Princess of Swords, earth of
air, appears like a beautiful avenging angel. Her head is crowned with the Medusa-
headed helmet, which mercifully is turned away from our view. For if we were to gaze
upon its awful face, we would surely be turned to stone. Turning things to stone
(“fixation of the volatile’—“materialization of Idea”) is just part of the job descrip-
tion for Princess of Swords, however.
      The suit of Swords (as Ruach, the intellect) is a wonderful aspect of our being
because, when we identify with the Ruach, we rise above and separate ourselves
from our lower nature, the animal soul (the Nephesh). However,when we identify
with the Ruach, we also separate ourselves from the higher parts of our souls that
represent greater realities and levels of consciousness than our Ruach is incapable
of comprehending. Consequently, the Ruach does everything it can to keep its grasp
on our identity. This is why the Eastern mystics warn us that the mind is a great
enemy. It must be defeated in battle. When the battle begins, the Ruach naturally
sends its finest swordswoman into the field—a warrior-princess who manifests
The Crazy Mixed-up World of Court Cards                                         197


everything that is inherent, yet hidden, in her lord, the ace, a mighty champion of
the mind—a Minerva, an Artemis, a Valkyrie,—-the Princess of Swords.
    Swirling clouds of gray-black dust and violent windbursts darken the heavens
and almost completely dominate and obscure what once was the yellows and blues
of this suit.
     Since Princesses do not rule degrees of the zodiacal year, we have no examples
of celebrated personalities who are/were Princesses of Swords.
198                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


KNIGHT OF DISKS
Fire oF EARTH

                                20° Leo to 20° Virgo

                                August 12 to September 11

                                Rules 7 of Wands; 8 of Disks; 9 of Disks

                                Original Titles: The Lord of the Wide and Fertile
                                Land; The King of the Spirits of Earth; King of the
                                Gnomes.

                                Crest: Winged stag’s head.

                                Symbols: Light brown horse. Ripe corn land.
                                Scepter with Hexagram of Zelator Adeptus Minor.

                                Hair: Dark.

                                Eyes: Dark.


      ] am doing the King of Pantacles. I didn’t like what I had done. Someone
      has lent me a genuine flail—it is like this [manuscript drawing of flail] a
      lovely instrument of solid wood. Most difÏcult to manage.”
                                            —Harris to Crowley, November 3, 1939.


The Knight of Disks is unique among his brother Knights. He appears to be the
shortest in stature. He rides a workhorse that seems to be more concerned with
eyeing the lush grass than with conveying his rider. His helmet is completely raised,
and he gazes at the fertile fields and hills, as if in contemplation of harvest, not
battle. His flail dangles near the grasses, suggesting the thrashing of wheat rather
than the thrashing of heads, and his shield is a disk that could double as a dish that
could hold enough food to feed a village. Am I making this up just because I'm
hungry and dinner is late? Not at all. Crowley writes that the function of the Knight
of Disks “is entirely confined to the production of food.”*”
     I am sure there are many geniuses and intellectually brilliant individuals whose
birthdays fall between August 12 to September 11 (Napoleon Bonaparte, Cardinal
Richelieu, Louis the XIV, Bill Clinton, Madonna, and H. P. Lovecraft to name a
few). Nonetheless, the natural character of this card is not that of a rocket scientist.
The Knight of Disks keeps his nose to the grindstone, and takes little interest in (and
has little respect for) intellectual musings or the finer aspects of culture or civiliza-
The Crazy Mixed-up World ofCourt Cards                                          199


tion. If ill-aspected, he will even make ignorance a virtue and take obstinate pride
in his own lack of sophistication and subtlety.
    Davey Crockett, Annie Oakley, and Country and Western stars Buck Owens,
Porter Wagoner, Patsy Cline, and Jim Reeves were all Knights of Disks.
    Rich browns, greens, and golden yellow dominate this card.
200                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


QUEEN OF DISKS
WATER OF EARTH

                  ae ~\         20° Sagittarius to 20° Capricorn

                                December 13 to January 9

                                Rules 10 of Wands; 2 of Disks; 3 of Disks

                                Original Titles: The Queen of the Thrones of
                                Earth; Queen of the Gnomes.

                                Crest: Winged goat’s head.

                                Symbols: Barren land. Light falls on only one side
                                of her face. Scepter with golden orb.

                                Hair: Dark.

                                Eyes: Dark.


      Persons signified by this card possess the finest of the quieter qualities. They
      are ambitious, but only in useful directions.””


Life-giving water to a thirsty Earth. What a beautiful concept. What a beautiful
tarot card. Her dress alone is worth looking at with a magnifying glass.
      The genteel author,Jane Austen, is an ideal model for Crowley's characteriza-
tion of this card, and matches his description in The Book of
                                                           Thoth perfectly. She was
quietly passive—but passivity, Crowley claims, “in its highest aspect.”** She and
many of her characters were “quiet, hard-working, practical, sensible, domesticated.””*
   Like Austen herself, however, there is much more to the Queen of Disks than
needlepoint and country dances. I believe, at least on one level, Aleister Crowley
was having us on when he wrote, “They are not intellectual, and not particularly
intelligent; but instinct and intuition are more than adequate for their needs.” ]
think he was getting closer to the truth when he wrote, “She thus represents the
ambition of matter to take part in the great work of Creation.”*”
      Think about that for a moment. That is a force to be reckoned with.
      Water of earth manifests in very complex and diverse ways, and these are
reflected in the broad spectrum of personalities who can embody the ambition of
matter to take part in the great work of creation. A Queen of Disks can be strong
and charismatic like her sister Joan of Arc, or just talented and charismatic like
Elvis Presley. She can be ruthless and manipulative like Catherine of Aragon, Joseph
Stalin, Mao Tse-tung, and Richard Nixon; or sensitive and idealistic like Woodrow
The Crazy Mixed-up World ofCourt Cards                                          201


Wilson, George Washington Carver, or Carl Sandburg. She can possess instinc-
tual, intuitive, and superior intelligence like Nostradamus, Johannes Kepler, Isaac
Newton, and Stephen Hawking; or she can be a giant of creative force like Ludwig
Van Beethoven, J. R. R. Tolkien, or Steven Spielberg.
    Dark greens and rich browns dominate the foreground of this card.
202                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


PRINCE OF DISKS
Arr OF EArTH

                                20° Aries to 20° Taurus

                                April 11 to May 10

                                Rules 4 of Wands; 5 of Disks; 6 of Disks

                                Original Titles: The Prince of the Chariot of Earth;
                                Prince and Emperor of the Gnomes.

                                Crest: Winged bull’s head.

                                Symbols: Flowery land. Bull. Dark scepter with orb
                                and cross. Orb held downward.

                                Hair: Dark Brown.

                                Eyes: Dark.


      The Prince of Disks is a devil. I've been a whole week on him & he is engender-
      ing a nervous breakdown in me coupled with starvation as he gives me no time to
      eat. He is a bastard. However, I hope I have caught him today. He swells & swells
      & I can't
            get him in the picture with all the farm produce & bulls you suggest.*
                                                —Harris to Crowley, date uncertain.

A devil indeed! But what a devil! I don’t think it’s a good idea to put too many
Princes of Disks in the same room. These fellows change the world with their “great
energy brought to bear upon the most solid of practical matters.””’ Consider this
short roster of Princes of Disks: Marcus Aurelius, William Shakespeare, Catherine
the Great, Thomas Jefferson, Robespierre, Ulysses S. Grant, Sigmund Freud, Karl
Marx, Nikolai Lenin, Adolf Hitler, Emperor Hirohito, Robert Oppenheimer, Harry
Truman, Golda Meir, and Saddam Hussein.
      You and I, however, are more likely to run into what I call the “garden variety”
Prince of Disks—and by “garden variety”I mean just that. Harris's Prince is seated
in a chariot filled with globular seeds that seem to be ready to burst into plants at
any moment. He is a very cool character. His eyes are closed in meditation, as if he
were mentally directing the brooding fecundity of the entire universe. He is the
picture of someone who is in control on the material plane. He may seema bit dull
and emotionless, but he’s not. He's just not a snob, and he doesn’t bother with things
he considers impractical. He’s the ultimate handyman. Crowley confirms that assess-
ment, telling us that “He is competent, ingenious, thoughtful, cautious, trustwor-
thy, imperturbable; he constantly seeks new uses for common things.”
      This is the darkest card of the suit of Disks, full of rich browns and blacks.
The Crazy Mixed-up World ofCourt Cards                                             203


PRINCESS OF DISKS
EARTH OF EARTH

Together with the Ace of Disks, rules the
Aries/Taurus/Gemini celestial quadrant above the
North Pole, and the area of Europe and Africa.

Original Titles: The Princess of the Echoing Hil s; A
The Rose of the Palace of Earth; Princess and              hi       .
Empress of the Gnomes. Throne of the Ace of
Disks.                                                      1 if},
Crest: Winged ram's head.                                   i)
Symbols: Grass. Flowers, grove of trees. Scepter           in
with disk. Disk is as others.                                   ;

Hair: Rich Brown.                                          er

Eyes: Dark.


    The Princess is now on the stocks. I wish she would not insist on being
    pregnant. She just will, so now I have let her get on with it. She chatters to
    me about being mixed up with the Virgin Mary."
                                          —Harris to Crowley, December 11, 1942.


We do not know for certain which card of the Thoth Tarot Lady Harris painted
last, but the date of the above note suggests she was working on the Princess of
Disks toward the very end of the project. If she did complete the deck with this
card, she certainly saved the best for last. For me, the Princess of Disks is the
most beautiful female figure in the entire Thoth Tarot. “She is strong and beau-
tiful,” Crowley afÏrms, “with an expression of intense brooding, as if about to
become aware of secret wonder.”To be embarrassingly honest, I am most pro-
foundly (and most hopelessly) in love with her. I am not alone in my sloppy ado-
ration of her divine image. Enlargements of this card adorn the living-room walls
of many of my colleagues, and it is one of the most frequently reproduced cards
of the deck.
    I now ask the reader to recall the Qabalistic fairytale we discussed in chapter
11, and the importance of the Princess as carrier of the essence of the highest high
and the lowest low. As earth of earth, she is the lowest court card of the lowest suit.
She is the ultimate princess. Not only is she pregnant with the highest high/ lowest
low (and everything in between) of the suit of Disks, she is pregnant with the high-
204                                          Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


est high/lowest low (and everything in between) of all the suits. She is the Malkuth
of Malkuths and carries within her body the potential of all possible possibilities,
and the key to perpetuating the life of the universe.
      As a priestess of Demeter, she arises in her glory from out of the Earth itself
and establishes her altar in the midst of a grove of barren and dying trees that her
fertile presence will now restore to green health. Her magic wand is the diamond-
tipped rod, symbolic of the essence of Kether, the highest high, and whose tetrahedral
form is the basic structure of all carbon-based life. She is wrapped in an enormous
cape of what appears to be animal fur and is crowned with the head and horns of
a ram. Her disk is a giant seed composed of thirty-six sections, perhaps suggesting
the source of the thirty-six small cards of the tarot to follow. The central germ of
the seed is the Chinese yin-yang. Dark yellows and browns radiate a warm and
almost humid atmosphere for this card. Textured grays combine to make this card
almost tactile.
      All this Qabalistic cosmology and Eleusinian mythology is fine and good, but
Crowley told us at the beginning of our discussion of the court cards that “these
cards are suitable as being descriptive,
                                      in a rough andempirical fashion,
                                                                 of divers types
of men and women.”” In a tarot reading, what kind of person does the Princess of
Disks represent? Because her potential is limitless, Crowley writes that she might
have the reputation of “bewildering inconsistency.”“ He uses the example of a lot-
tery, where it does not matter how many times a particular number has been drawn
in the past, each future draw provides the same odds of it being drawn or not drawn
again. In the old days of male chauvinism, this quality might have been summed up
in the somewhat sexist term “woman's prerogative.” That might have been where
Crowley was coming from when he wrote that the Princess of Disks represents
“Womanhood in its ultimate projection.””*
      As he concludes his comments on this card in The Book of Thoth, Crowley
writes as if he were ending the entire book. In a way, he was, because the Princess
of Disks is, in many ways, the last tarot card. I too would like to end our discussion
of the Court cards with his wonderful of benediction:

      Let every student of this Essay, and of this book of Tahuti, this living Book
      that guides man through all Time, and leads him to Eternity at every page,
      hold fast this simplest, most far-reaching Doctrine in his heart and mind,
      inflaming the inmost of His Being, that he also, having explored each recess
      of the Universe, may therein find the Light of Truth, so come to the
      Knowledge and Conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel, and accomplish
      the Great Work, attain the Summum Bonun, true Wisdom and perfect
      Happiness!”
                    CHAPTER                  NINETEEN

                                            GD
                       THE SMALL CARDS


     Hang on. It’s easier than you think?


Now we turn our attention to the thirty-six small cards. In the ancient decks, these
cards were called “pips” and were seldom more complex than simple geometrical
arrangements of Wands, Cups, Swords, or Disks. Sometimes, the number of the
card was printed on one or more corners, much like our modern playing cards. This
changed dramatically with the introduction of secret images taught to initiates of
the Golden Dawn, and the published deck suggested by Arthur Edward Waite and
executed by Pamela Coleman Smith. Suddenly, the small cards had images that
evoked feelings and emotions the same way the trumps did.
    There is a big difference between the Golden Dawn images and those of the
Waite/Smith deck. Waite, an influential member of the Golden Dawn, felt bound
by his oaths of secrecy to the order never to reveal the correct and esoteric images
and meanings of the tarot. The deck that he and Smith produced was created as a
vehicle to introduce the mysteries, not to reveal them. They certainly succeeded. It
is difÏcult to develop a complex or overly esoteric dogma around the deck, and for
this I must admit Waite did a good job of not violating his vows. What I am not sure
he foresaw was the fact that, over the years, the deck would become so wildly pop-
ular that its images would engender a perfectly viable self-referential divinatory
device of its own. In other words, the Waite/Smith deck may not be the perfect
Qabalistic tarot, but it is perfect whatever it is.
206                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


RECIPE FOR THE SMALL CARDS

The small cards of the Thoth Tarot take the Golden Dawn model as their basic
standard and, when considering them, we are immediately confronted with the
question of their titles and meanings. Why is the Two of Cups called Love and the
Seven of Cups called Debauch? Why is the Ten of Wands Oppression and the Ten
of Disks Wealth? Why are so many of the Swords horrible cards?
      The answer is a simple formula containing two Qabalistic and two astrologi-
cal factors. The formula is:


                                (n of s) + (p in zs) = se
             (Number of Suit) + (Planet in Zodiac Sign) = Small Card)


      In chapter 9, we learned the basics concerning the ten sephiroth, YHVH, and
the four Qabalistic Worlds. Now let’s look at the astrological factors.
      Let’s start with the signs of the zodiac and their divisions by quadruplicities
and triplicities.


QUADRUPLICITIES OF THE ZODIAC
The twelve signs of the zodiac are categorized, according to element into quadru-
plicities (four groups of three signs; see table 9). The four tarot suits are assigned to
each as follows:


      Wands: Fire signs (Aries, Leo, Sagittarius)
      Cups: Water signs (Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces)
      Swords: Air signs (Libra, Aquarius, Gemini)
      Disks: Earth signs (Capricorn, Taurus, Virgo)


TRIPLICITIES OF THE ZODIAC
The twelve signs of the zodiac are categorized according to modes into triplicities
(three groups of four signs; see table 10). The nine small cards of each suit are
assigned in groups of three to each as follows:


      Twos, Threes, Fours: Cardinal signs (Aries, Cancer, Libra, Capricorn)
      Fives, Sixes, Sevens: Fixed signs (Leo, Scorpio, Aquarius, Taurus)
      Eights, Nines, Tens: Mutable signs (Sagittarius, Pisces, Gemini, Virgo)


      When we put the zodiac signs in order, we see the small cards are ordered in
four repeating patterns of 2 through 10 (see table 11). Each small card represents
one decan (period of 10°) of the zodiac, and approximately ten days of the year (see
table 12).
                                                                                                                                                                         O1GEL                      °6 [EWS                        SPAed                    ‘SINS                          9B1POZ                                SUuBlS                 pues           sjuewie|g
                                                                                                                       EYL       jews               SPied                     G1e             PEyEoO|e                          0} ey)            SsuBys         jo ey)                    DBIPOZ                                                          OF Ely              JUEWEJO           JO sO)               UNS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0908
                                                                                                              SPUBM)             0} 84) e4j-4                             ‘suB/S                     SAND             0} EI s81BMA                          ‘sUBIS                      SPIOMS                        0} EY) 41y                           ‘sUBIS           SYSIQ            0} ey) yez                 (suBig

                       SONVM                                                                                                                                             SdNO                                                                                                                          SGYOMS                                                                                                                                 Sxysid
                                                                                                                              SdND           ee               PEINQuYL                        0) 08:43                Je;B/AA          subig                                SspiomME                       sue      pe;Ngiye                         0} eeu)            sry          eubig                    S4S1C    es"         PEINQuVE                      0) 6014)      YVeD   SUBIS
SpUBAA         eue      Pe|NquyS                                  0) eos)        e174                suBbls
                 ‘sovy)                  ‘oe                 (enyey6eg                                                                            ‘1e0uU8D)                        ‘Ojds00g                 (seosig                                                                                     ‘e3qI7)                ‘snLENby                 (UIWEH                                                           ‘woodeED)                          ‘snuney         (OBA

                                                        Vv                                     12°                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         aS                                            x
                                                                                                                               WZHONVO                                   |OIdYOOS                                                                                             vuaiT                                      |snravnov]                                      ININAD                        JNYOOMdVO                                   SNANVL
                                                        Oa                    SNNIVLLIOVS
                                   NeOIsiuIs                                | NOISHud                                   |MRIVM               NOG                         |MEIVA                          Nets                                                                                                       |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    wew                                          | eee


                                                                                                                                     e1qeL                         ‘01 jsujpsed                                         ‘suBis                      pex|4                  ‘suBjs                             pue                   e1qeinw                         suBjs
                                                                                                       OULL Sp-E-2            JOYORE YNS JUESEIdEJ                                               oLn feUIPUND                     ‘sUbiS            OU) ‘82-9-s                        Outpexty                   ‘subiS                   EU'60}-6-9                Gul erqeiniy              suBtg
                           T1VNIGUYVS                                                          SNDIS                                                                                                                                 Gs3axig                   SNOIS
                              (w‘seuy)
                                  copded                     ‘se0uRd        ‘Bqr]                                                                                                                                         ‘007)        ‘oxdioog             ‘snyenby                             (sruney,

                                                        %                                        zr                                      A                                                    v                                                                                                                                               R
                                               WAONVO                                   vugii                                VO NYOORd                                                        Og                                                                       SnRivndv                                                     SNUAVL
                                               PUD             sah                          pupReD            wv                 pup         Wang                                      pes Ong                                                                                 peg                                                        peng OnE
€l2      ry]                 €/2]                                 ¢[             Lel                            Fr] efel                           vy]                        Sli 9)Z|.                                                                                                9                    2 si
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ot                                    Zi]
                                 c i d e d
                 USUM em ind eu DeIpoz “sbub\s ewsUl YEPI0 spasmA Ut sno Bunedey vspwoasoernpesid ul 10}4°Old40GsuZznede.uGnosuL SANIsVwLeIyOVeSdwren op onsjo ween |Ce pute
OSarav ong snpwesnvi wre INCINAD ane HWEEADINVD semen 9momang TamOedDWIA
dz rlbet etre Qi yoal le} Ss5ive Vy dil T “ui FS aN you                                                                                                       ZYNWBOONMAVD ‘op ndv snnivme anaStaaO!SId Eoamen
SONVM Sysd SaYOMS sdNd SONVMan8 left SySliGe |clSreUe R nesaisi|9Ai]Sssieaeizloe |som sxsid |soupy |68%s*q ol
                     e4rd demus pa‘Zn t squasauodajnsesBosd |umap popod40) ouJnO G1yew(sassBap SP8D yBnosuL OUI [BOBIPOZ
                                                                                                JO H *gATpoZ pur fyormnyxoude OT shup joJBOA
                                                                                                                                             4 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               aun ‘seak

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1                      * ‘1°eS “snus,   Ansa   -nunry
                                                                                      SHULL        St oy)
                            BulwAS sIU-yWe 0 si'w0o7d'aTr syourtd amaa1981 pousise “tuIpUssoPyuouwuybysySD Ruymoypjos>JapBsurourBeq JOJOfunauoOUdtos ) JAOseyouaydsyuoeu—s3uidids :saps0 sosoyd0}s‘Wis BIXoSud uojea*sywo0updansgy 2J92oL spK@izeoude JO ‘ay
                                                                 ou) pus JO soup pus
    saz aartgevs]t aewt|t 3Sgn 9 2 ej ININZD6 Zio.) wWAQNVO€ w\ om ODBIA vueri c SAIMVLLOVS fe) Nw                                                                                                                                           arey
                  I SAOE|ao|t]osaP|te(ro] daVieengewwet] csana) “r|enaAS O0|8] eo|e3t9raae-(eos|ovsaee-eczolaee|les|epjun O6ES|oer] |azne|can¢-es| aeCv-ejee p|i3na 9 4 BetPj, |a86-t e|joSre,lLt asze ¢€ ovie ae3Owsa9ney 4 aiej Sasidar§o& oj]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |ee ore
                                                                                                                                                                S19BL                   “Pt      OL      YNOD                  SPABD                GINY               Ol)        ISU                  SPABD
                                                                                                                                                                              sajamL              JO days NOL                   SPB           ,d1U,                SUP     [RWIS               SPSHD
                                                                                                                                      9)       Uy ‘sIYT                  ‘sUdOND                 PUB SPdUL YG               , d1NJ,          WOIJ           07           JO dUO              UBIS       0} OT                      JO SU)    “yxoU

                     A                                               R                                   x                             Er                                   we                                      dil                       oT                                         “UW                                            iz                                   SA                               a                             €
             surmv                                         SOMOAVL                              ININAD                       WAONVD                                        om                                ODMIA                          vuael                                                                   |SN IVLLIDVS                         NYOINV                                |SARAVAOYV                          Saosld
          empueg         one                                pema nore                             eqns       ore             (EBIOD           EERE                      Pema ona                         erwe ney     seg                  epee            awe                        woms sepaen                                  OR       ons                    wep              wre                     poms ane               EON          oman
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               iT

                      g                                                    |pwbjuy                                    Veen 40 |eould                                                          Blu                                       sould                                          jo                   146jUy                      jo|jouseny                                  |jo@ouyg                      |Buy
i» veenDSpur jo|joeou 84810                                                          SP1OMS                           edng                             Opus                                      tyso                        SPIueen
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                OMG jo ||                                                                      Spusem                                 S810                                   Sps0mMg                        edng                       Aueen jo
        we eer oaores oe ot oor oe at ay At Les oe 6. po a ne ts                                                                                                                                                                                    f-6       at                      To u-e |e s                                  1c one                                           e we                     . ne                                      ta
                                                                                                                                                                —


                                                                                    S1GeL                °S| :SeS ODU}Jg                                                SEUOIY                               JO G4}              Sed                      PUB                Ss9/NY                      JO SJUBIPBNH                                                JO 908dS
                                                s eoUuLd                                jO SySIG                                                      steoupd                               jC Spuspxy                                                       SsesUL,                             20 MND                                                                  StesuULd                       )0 SPs0OMEG
                                               SUCIY)                  JOOL) OY JO SYM                                                                CUCINA]              0 Oy) Osy JO SPU                                                                BUOHLL                10OH Go §0                                                                              GUDIUL           JOOt) Ooy JOSPIOME
                                                seine                1 HRY,                   wupenD                                                    sony              on GUE                    wupen)                                                  sony              oy P                      wrespend)                                                            eoiny           ou 3€aeQa            yaupend
                                                            aroqe          ap TON Od                                                                              ancgs                AP QUON         50g                                                               OAOgS         Ot                0d                                                                          aange        oq) QUON          Od

                                        suey                                          rR
                                                                                ernennel,                     INmaO                            aes
                                                                                                                                           WBONVD                                      oni                          | |Ss
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ween |a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             o1geese                                                                    |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ONRIVL IONS Ae                                 isooned¥S                    |onereneyels                            Cid
                                NVM                                         SNSIC                                                          Sdfd                     |SGNVM                             |SNSIG                          |(|SGHOMS                                      SdND               |SGNVM                                   |SNSIG                             |{|SQYOMS                              SdNd
                               PLELzZ                                      Ls                 L193                                           yleéel                          ¢/s              2)612)                                              ¢/       yi                    aw                    Fa           & tel                             Z £1
                         Boon            Je                         Heid                                                                                         tig                   fe                                               aren _f0                                                                                   Pp         msend               po
                         PON                                          ad pP                            spans P                        oda) Pp                      ee                                  eit, Pp                         spaomg " ounCat)                                                     SpOe,                                    ord                              spi0ag                          3)
210                                            Understanding Aletster Crowley's Thoth Tarot


      Now let’s turn our attention to the planets.


THE PLANETS
Starting at 0° Leo, planets are assigned in the following repeating order:


      Saturn
      Jupiter
      Mars
      Sol
      Venus
      Mercury
      Luna


This is the descending order of the planetary spheres on the Tree of Life (see table 13).“
      Astrologically speaking, an interesting and symbiotic relationship exists between
the signs of the zodiac and the planets. First, each planet rules (or bestows its partic-
ular nature and character on) one or more signs of the zodiac. (For example; warlike
and fiery Mars rules aggressive Aries and passionate Scorpio.) Second, there are cer-
tain signs of the zodiac that exalt a specific planet, almost as if it were an honored
guest upon whom much attention and preference is bestowed. (For example: Aries,
the ram of spring, exalts the Sun and welcomes its return from winter darkness.)
     Because of the way the planets are allotted to the signs of the zodiac through-
out the thirty-six small cards, we are bound to have some planets happy in their
zodiacal homes and some zodiacal homes happy to host their planets. Conversely,
some planets are decidedly unhappy in their zodiacal homes and some zodiacal
homes are equally unhappy to host their planets. This astrological harmony or
disharmony is a major factor in determining the characteristic meaning of a small
card. It is great fun to peruse a good astrology book and match the aspects of the
individual small cards with the descriptions of the character of people who have
the same aspect in their natal charts. A perfect example is the Seven of Cups, which,
in the Thoth Tarot, is called Debauch. It is Venus in Scorpio. Venus is not well dig-
nified in Scorpio. Astrologer Joan Quiqley wrote of this aspect:


      Common types with Venus in Scorpio dissipate relentlessly and are fre-
      quently degenerates or drunks. Most of you overdo when it comes to sex.”

      What a perfect description of a tarot card whose traditional title is “Lord of
Illusionary Success,” and that Crowley simply calls Debauch.
The Small Cards                                                                       211


GOOD NEWS/BAD NEWS
Now we can couple the astrological factors with everything we've learned about
the Tree of Life and the four Qabalistic worlds, and begin working out the nature
of each small card. Unfortunately, while the formula is very simple, the interpreta-
tion is rather complex. As a matter of fact, it is very much like one of those jokes that
starts out “I've got some good news, and I’ve got some bad news.”
    Take the Seven of Disks, Failure, as an example:


  * The good news is—we have Saturn in Taurus. Saturn is very happy in
    Taurus. It is one of the most stable match-ups of sign and planet imaginable.
  * The bad news is that Saturn and Taurus find themselves in the seventh
     sephira, Netzach, and Netzach holds a horribly imbalanced position on the
     Tree of Life.


On the other hand:


  * The good news is that Netzach is the sphere of Venus and Venus rules
     Taurus.
  © The bad news is that all this is in Assiah, the lowest of the Qabalistic worlds,
    an environment so earthy that poor Venus is totally dethroned from her
    accustomed place in heaven. Add to that the fact that this is happening so
    low on the Tree of Life that the bad news is amplified to such a disastrous
     level that the good news is just not good enough to make any difference ...
     and so we have FAILURE.


Or how about the Nine of Swords, Cruelty?


  * The good news is that we find ourselves on the very stable ninth sephira,
     Yesod.
  * The bad news is that Swords rule the mind and reason. Yesod is so low on
     the Tree of Life that all that good intellect has degenerated to heartless
     Passion.


On the other hand:


   * The good news is that we have very active Mars in very active Gemini.
  * The bad news is that Mars and Gemini do not agree about how to be active.
     Mars is focused and directed; he attacks with the forward thrusts of a
     warrior. Gemini, on the other hand, is scattered and operates best while
     flitting around. This is very frustrating to Mars, who now, because he is
212                                           Understanding Aleister Crowleys Thoth Tarot


      totally unrestrained by intellect and reason, becomes downright mean. Voila!
      Cruelty!


In this chapter, I will talk briefly about each of the thirty-six small cards. As before,
I will not hesitate to quote liberally from The Book of
                                                     Thoth. But, as much as I respect
Crowley’s genius (and my own twisted insights), I want to encourage you to use
the formula (n of s) + (p in zs) = sc to work out your own new and more innovative
meanings for the small cards yourself. The more you learn about the Qabalah and
astrology, the deeper your understanding of these cards will become. Go ahead. It's
easier than you think.
The Small Cards                                                                  213


TWO OF WANDS
DOMINION

(Mars in Aries)

0° to 10° Aries

March 21 to March 30

Original Title: Lord of Dominion.

Golden Dawn Model: A hand appears from clouds
and grasps two crossed wands. Flames appear
where wands meet.

King Scale for Chokmah: Pure soft Blue.

The Four Scales for Mars: Scarlet; Red; Venetian
Red; Bright Red, rayed Azure or Emerald.

The Four Scales for Aries: Scarlet; Red; Brilliant
Flame; Glowing Red.

Formula: 2 (Chokmah) of Wands (Atziluth) + Mars in Aries = DOMINION


Following the basic Mathers design, the Two of Wands exhibits a textbook use of
the color scale—the reds of Aries upon an explosive background of martial reds,
azure, and emerald. The colors inform us in no uncertain terms that Mars is very
happy in Aries and that Aries is happy to play host to Mars.
    Crowley oberves that this strong astrological marriage in Chokmah (where
the elements first manifest) makes the Two of Wands “fire in its best and highest
form”” and represents what he calls “Will in its most exalted form. . . ideal Will,
independent of any given object.”*!
    The Wands are demon-headed Tibetan Dorjes.’? Like the thunderbolt of
Zeus, the Dorje represents the directed power of the gods, and serves as the instru-
ment of divine destruction that must, of necessity, precede the creative cycle. “The
virgin ovum,” Crowley claims, “must be broken in order to fertilize it.” The six
flames bursting behind the Dorjes allude to the Sun,“ which is exalted in Aries
and very happy to be there.
    See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
214                                          Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


THREE OF WANDS
VIRTUE

                               (Sol in Aries)

                               10° to 20° Aries

                               March 31 to April 10

                               Original Title: Lord of Established Strength.

                               Golden Dawn Model: A hand (as in the Two of
                               Wands) appears from clouds, and grasps three
                               wands in the center (two crossed, the third
                               upright). Flames appear where wands meet.

                               King Scale for Binah: Crimson.

                               The Four Scales for Sol: Orange; Gold Yellow;
                               Rich Amber; Amber, rayed Red.

The Four Scales for Aries: Scarlet; Red; Brilliant Flame; Glowing Red.

Formula: 3 (Binah) of Wands (Atziluth) + Sol in Aries = VIRTUE


Graphically, this card is one of the simplest in the entire deck, and holds closely to
the Golden Dawn model. Harris skillfully uses each of the ten colors of the scales
to present three gold-and-amber lotus wands trimmed in scarlet and set upon an
orange background of brilliant flames. The effect is one, not only of brilliance, but
of immense heat. It represents the primal solar energy that first penetrates the soil
in spring to awaken seeds that have slumbered all winter.
      Along with the aces and twos (the other two cards representing the supernal
triad of the Tree of Life), Crowley holds all the threes in particular veneration. The
aces are the unmanifest roots of their element and suit, and the twos represent the
element and suit manifested as ideas. But with the threes, Crowley argues, “The
idea has become fertilized; the triangle has been formulated. In each case, the idea
is of a certain stability which can never be upset, but from whicha child can issue.”**
In tarot, that child is the remaining small cards, fours through tens.
      Whata truly noble and well-aspected card this is. The Sun is in Aries, the sign
of his exaltation, and couldn't be happier. Furthermore, this harmonious and ener-
getic marriage takes place in the third sephira, Binah, adding sublime understand-
ing to the mix. The great power (and the will to use that power) that we saw
represented by the Two of Wands has now become fertilized and expressed in terms
of character as Virtue.
     See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
The Small Cards                                                                        215


FOUR OF WANDS
COMPLETION

(Venus in Aries)

20° to 30° Aries

April 11 to April 20

Original Title: The Lord of Perfected Work.

Golden Dawn Model: Two hands appear from
clouds right and left of the card and clasp in the
center with the grip of the First Order.They hold
four wands or torches crossed. Flames appear where
wands meet.

King Scale for Chesed: Deep Violet.

The Four Scales for Venus: Emerald Green; Sky
Blue; Early Spring Green; Bright Rose or Cerise, rayed Pale Green.

The Four Scales for Aries: Scarlet; Red; Brilliant Flame; Glowing Red.

Formula: 4 (Chesed) of Wands (Atziluth) + Venus in Aries = COMPLETION


As we learned in our discussion of Atu X, Fortune, in the fourth sephira, Chesed,
the gunas revolve. And so, even though it is a total departure from the Golden
Dawn model, Harris creates a rotating wheel by transforming four wands into eight
spokes of the wheel of Completion. Each wand is balanced and perfectly comple-
mented with a dove of Venus and the ram of Mars-ruled Aries. Venus in Aries,
Crowley points out, “indicates that one cannot establish one’s work without tact
and gentleness.”** Harris ignores the deep violet of Chesed and focuses upon the
greens and reds of this planet and sign.
     Chesed is fourth sephira, but it is the first one below the Abyss. Consequently,
the fours of the tarot represent the first solid manifestation of their suits. This is
the classic characteristic of the Demiurge (Demiourgos)—a god who, as we learned
in chapter 8, is, by all appearances, the first principal and creator of its universe, but
who, in reality, is only the fourth principal and completely unaware of the three
abstract principals (gods) that preceded it.
     Zeus, Ammon, Jupiter,Jove, and Jehovah are classic examples of the Demiurge,
who thinks he is god, but who is really only the visible manifestation of the invisible
primal forces that created him. Nevertheless, the Demiurge brings order and the rule
of law to the universe, a characteristic that is shared by all the small-card fours.
     See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
216                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


FIVE OF WANDS
STRIFE

  SS5 me                         (Saturn in Leo)

                      af i       0° to 10° Leo
                                 July 22 to August 1

                                 Original Title: Lord of Strife.

                                 Golden Dawn Model: Two hands (one from each
                                 side of the card) appear from clouds and clasp in
                                 the center with the grip of the First Order. They
                  |          ‘   hold four wands, crossed two over two. A third
              ,                  hand appears from a cloud at the lower part of the
              1}                 card, holding an upright wand, which passes
                                 between the others. Flames flash where wands
                                 meet.


King Scale for Geburah: Orange.

The Four Scales for Saturn: Indigo; Black; Blue-black; Black, rayed Blue.

The Four Scales for Leo: Yellow (greenish); Deep Purple; Grey; Reddish Amber.

Formula: 5 (Geburah) of Wands (Atziluth) + Saturn in Leo = STRIFE


In The Book ofThoth, Crowley writes more about the Five of Wands than any other
small card in this suit. Could it be because this card represents the first decan of
Leo, which happens to be where we find the Ascendant in Crowley's astrological
natal chart? Crowley identified strongly with Leo. His signature even bore the
astrological sign of Leo in place of the “A” of Aleister.
      This is one of only three cards on which Crowley literally left his mark. If we
look closely at the orb of the winged solar disk atop the large version of the Chief
Adept’s wand in the center of the card, we find the image of Crowley’s personal
magical device, the Mark of the Beast upon the seven-pointed star of Babalon. This
symbol is the device of the Ace of Disks (by tradition, one of the cards that most
often bears the signature of the deck’s creator) and the Prince of Wands, who also
rules the 30° period in which we find Crowley’s Ascendant.
     Like Crowley himself, this card is a wild mix of profound contradictions: fiery
Leo is happy enough in fiery Geburah, and Geburah implies motion and offers an
environment of strength and activity. Saturn, on the other hand, presents a heavy
The Small Cards                                                                   217


and constant resistance to all this. This card is a picture of hot, pressurized magma
struggling to reach the surface of the volcano, but frustrated by the sheer weight of
the mountain itself.
    See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
218                                                       Understanding Aleister Crowley’s Thoth Tarot


SIX OF WANDS
VICTORY

                            om               (Jupiter in Leo)

       ;                        2            10° to 20° Leo
                                    w        August 2 to August 11
                                             Oniginal Title: Lord of Victory.

                                        iy   Golden Dawn Model: Two hands appear from
                                             clouds right and left of the card and clasp in the
                                             center with the grip of the First Order. They hold
                                "six wands, crossed three and three. Flames appear

           ,
               y2Ny\. N where wands meet.
                    i
           >
                Y Af,ny
                        a   \
                                             King Scale for Tiphareth: Clear Pink Rose.

                                             The Four Scales for Jupiter: Violet; Blue; Rich
Purple; Bright Blue, rayed Yellow Emerald.

The Four Scales for Leo: Yellow (greenish); Deep Purple; Grey; Reddish Amber.

Formula: 6 (Tiphareth) of Wands (Atziluth) + Jupiter in Leo = VICTORY


The Six of Wands is called Victory; the Six of Cups is Pleasure; the Six of Swords
is Science; and the Six of Disks is Success. All the sixes are wonderful cards. What
gives? Are the four sixes special? You bet they are!
      On the Tree of Life, Tiphareth is the direct reflection of Kether. It is the Son of
the Father. It is perfectly balanced, left to right and top to bottom. It is the heart center
of our psychic bodies and the Ruach of our souls. It rules as the central Sun King, sur-
rounded by the spheres of the planets: Chesed (Jupiter), Geburah (Mars), Netzach
(Venus), Hod (Mercury), Yesod (Moon), and even Binah (Saturn). Consequently, no
matter how incompatible the card’s planetary and zodiacal relationship may be, if that
card is a six, we are in Tiphareth, and if we are in Tiphareth we're looking good.
     In the case of the Six of Wands, we are doubly blessed with the happy mar-
riage of expansive, boisterous, and generous Jupiter in powerful Sun-ruled Leo.
This is the recipe for triumphant Victory.
     This card is a relatively faithful version of the Golden Dawn model. The wands
are a bit more elaborate and represent those used by various GD ofÏcers. The two
topped with winged solar disks are those of the Chief Adept, the others are clearly
Phoenix and Lotus wands.
   See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
The Small Cards                                                                     219


SEVEN OF WANDS
VALOUR

(Mars in Leo)

20° to 30° Aries

August 12 to August 22

Original Title: Lord of Valour.

Golden Dawn Model: Two gripped hands holding
six wands, three are crossed. A third hand appears
from a cloud at the lower part of the card, holding
an upright wand, which passes between the others.
Flames flash where wands meet.

King Scale for Netzach: Amber.

The Four Scales for Mars: Red; Venetian Red;
Bright Red, rayed Azure or Emerald.

The Four Scales for Leo: Yellow (greenish); Deep Purple; Grey; Reddish Amber.

Formula: 7 (Netzach) of Wands (Atziluth) + Mars in Leo = VALOUR


The background of the Seven of
                             Wands is deep purple, but, other than that, this card
is a near carbon copy of the Six ofWands. A crude seventh wand, more like a club,
overshadows the other six and delivers a sobering message: “The four Sevens are
not capable of bringing any comfort; each one represents the degeneration of the
element. Its utmost weakness is exposed in every case.”’
    There is still enough power and energy in the Seven of Wands to slug it out.
But the situation has degenerated into such a mess that nobody is sure with whom
to slug it out! It may be that a blow here or there will find its mark, but, more times
than not, it’s a waste of energy. Crowleys sums it up aphoristically, “Patriotism, so
to speak, is not enough.”**
    Warlike Mars may find a measure of moral support in proud and fiery Leo,
but machismo is a tragic joke this far down the Tree of Life in the weak and unbal-
anced environment of Netzach (natural home of sensitive, peace-loving Venus).
The high art of battle has been replaced with the chaos of a mindless melee. “The
army,” Crowley observes, “has been thrown into disorder; if victory is to be won, it
will be by dint of individual valour—a ‘soldiers’ battle.”*°
     See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
220                                                  Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


EIGHT OF WANDS
SWIFTNESS

             =                          (Mercury in Sagittarius)
4 fiV 73                   Wi
                           S \\
                                         s      S ..
                                        0° to 10° Sagittarius
      :                ‘           4)   November 23 to December 2
   wy                      mm           Original Title: Lord of Swiftness.

             ~~                         Golden Dawn Model: Four hands (two from each
€a             a | >                    side of the card) appear from clouds; clasped in two
                  of                    pairs in the center with the grip of the First Order.
                       '   .            They hold eight wands, crossed four with four.
                       ;       .        Flames appear where wands meet.
                       y                King Scale for Hod: Violet.
                                        The Four Scales for Mercury: Yellow; Purple; Grey;
                                        Indigo, rayed Violet.

The Four Scales for Sagittarius: Blue; Yellow; Green; Dark vivid Blue.

Formula: 8 (Hod) of Wands (Atziluth) + Mercury in Sagittarius = SWIFTNESS


If this card doesn't electrocute you, it may tickle you to death. Harris departs dramat-
ically from the Golden Dawn model, and offers us a portrait of energy becoming
matter: “Light-wands turned into electrical rays, sustaining or even constituting Matter
by their vibrating energy.” Without mentioning Einstein or the formula e=mc’,
Crowley goes so far as to state, “This card, therefore, represents energy of high veloc-
ity, such as furnishes the master-key to modern mathematical physics.”*!
          Swiftness is the perfect title for this card, because it represents everything that
requires speed and a high-frequency level to hold together, whether that be a busi-
ness endeavor, a romance, or the sum of all the matter in the universe. All this is
fine and good, but what does all that mean when this card appears in a tarot read-
ing? Let’s look at the formula.
          Mercury is in Sagittarius, where the element fire has become stabilized, and is emi-
nently comfortable. This partnership is doubly energized by being in Hod, the sphere
of Mercury. Even Hod’s low and unbalanced position on the Tree of Life does little to
diminish the intense activity of this almost overly stimulated coupling. This card is like
two people who have had too much coffee who stay up all night, talking simultane-
ously,
   A lot maybe said.A lot maybe learned. But, inevitably,
                                                     they are both going to crash.
  See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
The Small Cards                                                                         221


NINE OF WANDS
STRENGTH

(Moon in Sagittarius)

10° to 20° Sagittarius

December 3 to December 12

Original Title: Lord of Great Strength.

Golden Dawn Model: Four hands (two from each
side of the card) appear from clouds; clasped in two
pairs in the center with the grip of the First Order.
They hold eight wands, crossed four over four. A
fifth hand appears from the bottom center of the
card holding a ninth wand upright, which crosses
the point ofjunction with the others. Flames flash
where wands meet.

King Scale for Yesod: Indigo.

The Four Scales for Moon: Blue; Silver; Cold Pale Blue; Silver, rayed Violet.

The Four Scales for Sagittarius: Blue; Yellow; Green; Dark vivid Blue.

Formula: 9 (Yesod) of Wands (Atziluth) + Moon in Sagittarius = STRENGTH


Holding very close to the Golden Dawn description and color scales, the Nine of
Wands tells its story in almost quiet simplicity. Eight of the wands are arrows, each
of which has a crescent Moon as the head and eight Moons for feathers. The great
central wand, with the Sun at its top and the Moon at its bottom, represents the path
of Sagittarius on the Tree of Life, which joins Tiphareth (Sun) to Yesod (Moon).
“Here the Moon,” Crowley writes, “the weakest of the planets, is in Sagittarius, the
most elusive of the Signs; yet it dares call itself Strength.”
     The source of this confident strength is the card’s position in Yesod on the Tree
of Life. Not only is Yesod the natural sephira of the Moon (making our Moon here
very comfortable—even if it is in Sagittarius), it is also the Foundation, the “seat of the
great crystallization of Energy.”** As Crowley observes, “The Nine represents always
the fullest development of the Force in its relation with the Forces above it.”
     This card indicates great strength, but its strength lies in its ability to change
perpetually. Crowley gave what is perhaps the simplest meaning of this card when
he wrote: “Defense, to be effective, must be mobile.”**
     See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
222                                        Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


TEN OF WANDS
OPPRESSION

                              (Saturn in Sagittarius)

                              20° to 30° Sagittarius

                              December 13 to December 21

                              Original Title: Lord of Oppression.

                              Golden Dawn Model: Four hands (two from each
                              side of the card) appear from clouds; clasped in two
                              pairs in the center with the grip of the First Order.
                              They hold eight wands, crossed four with four. A
                              fifth hand appears from the bottom center of the
                              card holding a ninth and tenth wand upright,
                              which cross the point ofjunction with the others.
                              Flames flash where wands meet.

King Scale for Malkuth: Yellow.

The Four Scales for Saturn: Indigo; Black; Blue-black; Black, rayed Blue.

The Four Scales for Sagittarius: Blue; Yellow; Green; Dark vivid Blue.

Formula: 10 (Malkuth) of Wands (Atziluth) + Saturn in Sagittarius =
OPPRESSION


All factors conspire to make this an altogether unpleasant card. Saturn's iron heel
brutally pins poor Sagittarius (the lightest and most ethereal of the fire signs) to
the floor of inflexible Malkuth. If zodiac signs could dream, the Ten of Wands
would be Sagittarius’s worst nightmare. Harris basically follows the Golden Dawn
model with this card, and is meticulously faithful to the color scales. That, how-
ever, is where the similarities end. Her Ten of Wands is an explosive and suffocat-
ing image of oppression and repression.
     Crowley writes that Malkuth, “depends from the other nine Sephiroth, but is
not directly in communication with them. It is become a blind Force; so, the most
violent form of that particular energy, without any modifying influences.” Blind
force, Crowley points out, in the suit of Wands means “Fire in its most destructive
aspect.”
The Small Cards                                                                   223


     Harris ingeniously illustrates this by transforming the two Dorjes (which in
the Two ofWands were the symbols of celestial power) into dark iron prison bars.
Crowley describes the card thus:


    The whole picture suggests oppression and repression. It is a stupid and
    obstinate cruelty from which there is no escape. It is Will which has not
    understood anything beyond its dull purpose, its “lust of result”, and will
    devour itself in the conflagrations it has evoked.”


    See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
224                                          Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


TWO OF CUPS
LOVE

                               (Venus in Cancer)

                               0° to 10° Cancer

                               June 21 to July 1

                               Original Title: Lord of Love.

                               Golden Dawn Model: From cloud and water at the
                               bottom, a hand appears holding by a single stem
                               two lotuses, one rising vertically from the other.
                               Upon the stem between the lotuses two dolphins
                               cross. Two fountains of water (silver to the left, gold
                               to the right) spring from the top lotus and fall upon
                               the dolphins then down into two cups, which in
                               turn overflow and flood the bottom of the card.

Queen Scale for Chokmah: Grey.

The Four Scales for Venus: Emerald Green; Sky Blue; Early Spring Green;
Bright Rose or cerise, rayed Pale Green.

The Four Scales for Cancer: Amber; Maroon; Rich bright Russet; Dark
Greenish Brown.

Formula: 2 (Chokmah) of Cups (Briah) + Venus in Cancer = LOVE


The Two of Cups is perhaps the most beautiful of the small cards of the Thoth
Tarot. While Harris doesn’t completely ignore the color scales, she does give her-
self room for innovation. The calm green sea, the rose-colored lotuses, and the
amber dolphins (or are they Koi?) conform nicely, but she breaks rank a bit by giving
us a violet sky. The card is magnificently beautiful and a fitting representative of
the first manifestation of the element water. It is the energy of water in its best and
highest form.
      Harris shows her appreciation of the card by sharing a perhaps apochryphal
event involving the card: “Also [at the exhibition] a little person aged 2, scuttling &
crawling, was asked which picture: Straight she went to No. 2 Cups, Love. I thought
she would forget & asked her again 10 minutes later & she toddled off to the same
Picture. “That” she said again.”
The Small Cards
                                                                                 225


    Because the number two (Chokmah on the Tree of Life) is particularly
                                                                            expres-
sive of Will, Crowley wrote:


    This card might really be renamed the Lord of Love under Will for
                                                                           that is
    its full and true meaning. It shows the harmony of the male and
                                                                       the female:
    interpreted in the largest sense. It is perfect and placid harmony, radiating
                                                                                  an
    intensity ofjoy and ecstasy,””


    See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
226                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


THREE OF CUPS
ABUNDANCE

                               (Mercury in Cancer)

                                10° to 20° Cancer

                               July 2 to July 11

                               Original Title: Lord of Abundance.

                               Golden Dawn Model: A hand appears from clouds
                               at the bottom of the card, and grasps the stems of
                               four lotuses or water lilies. Two flowers rise to the
                               right and left and overhang two cups. The third and
                               fourth flowers arise between the lower two and
                               overhang and pour water into a single cup at the
                               top of the card. The top cup overflows in two
                               streams that fill and overflow the lower two cups.

Queen Scale for Binah: Black.

The Four Scales for Mercury: Yellow; Purple; Grey; Indigo, rayed Violet.

The Four Scales for Cancer: Amber; Maroon; Rich bright Russet; Dark
Greenish Brown.

Formula: 3 (Binah) of Cups (Briah) + Mercury in Cancer = ABUNDANCE


The three factors of our formula conspire to create a marriage made in heaven.
“Mercury is the Will or Word of the All-Father,” Crowley states. “Here its influ-
ence descends upon the most receptive of the Signs.”””
     In an exuberant interpretation of the Golden Dawn model, Harris fills the sur-
face of the Three of Cups to overflowing. The images crowd to the very edges of the
card. Her choice of colors is drawn directly from the dictated scales with one stun-
ning exception—the bright red pomegranate cups. They are elevated above a tran-
quil sea by lotuses and filled with living water by other overhanging lotus blossoms.
Crowley calls this the card of Demeter and Persephone and “the fulfillment of the
Will of Love in abounding joy. It is the spiritual basis of fertility.”””
      One could not ask for a more perfect picture of sensuous pleasure and plenty.
The imagery of the pomegranates, however, carries a subtle warning. Abundance has
its price. Because she swallowed a few seeds of the pomegranate, Persephone was
The Small Cards                                                                 227


obliged to spend part of every year in the dark realms of her husband, Pluto, the
Lord of the Dead. None of the Gods of Olympus, not even great Zeus, could break
the spell. Crowley interprets it thus: “The lesson seems to be that the good things
of life, although enjoyed, should be distrusted.”””
    See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
228                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


FOUR OF CUPS
LUXURY

‘naa Say oe Oe                  (Moon in Cancer)

            a            20° to 30° Cancer
  ,          Aly         4     July 12 to July 21
              y

              7                 Original Title: Lord of Blended Pleasure.

                   :            Golden Dawn Model: A hand appears from clouds
                                at the bottom of the card grasping three stems of a
                                lotus. Two green leaves grow from the right and left
                                stems, forming a cross between four cups arranged
                                as a square. The center stem flowers at the top of
                                the card. Two streams of water flow right and left
                                from the flower, filling the top two cups, which
                                overflow and fill the two lower cups.

Queen Scale for Chesed: Blue.

The Four Scales for Moon: Blue; Silver; Cold Pale Blue; Silver, rayed Sky Blue.

The Four Scales for Cancer: Amber; Maroon; Rich bright Russet; Dark
Greenish Brown.

Formula: 4 (Chesed) of Cups (Briah) + Moon in Cancer = LUXURY


This card is really loaded. As a matter of fact, it borders on being too much of a
good thing. Just look at the formula: four is Chesed, the sphere of generous, expan-
sive, and beneficent Jupiter.Jupiter is exalted in Cancer, and Cancer is ruled by the
Moon. Can the components of one card get any cozier? No, but, in this case, famil-
arity is starting to breed contempt and eventually enough will be enough. When
this card appears in a reading, enjoy the moment, but don't expect it to last forever.
     The sea that was so still in the Three of Cups is now restless. The Cups have
become heavy, the bottom two have sunk to the water's surface and are resting pre-
cariously on the lotus stems themselves; the upper two cups have actually flattened
out the lotus blossoms and are threatening to collapse the entire plant. The source
of the water, the single blossom at the top of the card, is wilted and has lost several
petals. It gives the appearance that it is about to run out ofjuice. I believe it is.
      Like the Demiurge itself, the Four of Cups, in its self-absorbed arrogance, thinks
Luxury is the god of the suit of Cups—all
                                     the while never dreaming that it owes its very
existence to the sublime true gods of the supemnal triad, the Ace, Two, and Three of Cups.
      See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
The Small Cards                                                                    229


FIVE OF CUPS
DISAPPOINTMENT

(Mars in Scorpio)

0° to 10° Scorpio

October 23 to November 1

Original Title: Lord of Loss in Pleasure.

Golden Dawn Model: A hand appears from clouds
at the bottom of the card holding lotuses or water
lilies. Flowers fall right and left and overhang five
cups arranged as a square with one in the center.
The lotus stem ascends between the cups as a foun-
tain. No water comes from the flowers. All the cups
are empty.


Queen Scale for Geburah: Scarlet Red.

The Four Scales for Mars: Scarlet; Red; Venetian Red; Bright Red, rayed Azure
or Emerald.

The Four Scales for Scorpio: Green Blue; Dull Brown; Very dark Brown; Livid
Indigo Brown.

Formula: 5 (Geburah) of Cups (Briah) + Mars in Scorpio =
DISAPPOINTMENT


With this card, the suit of Cups takes a dramatic and sinister turn. This is very dis-
appointing, because the Five of Cups had so much going for it. Discarding the con-
figuration of the Golden Dawn model that displays five empty cups arranged as a
square with one cup in the center, Crowley
                                        has Harris arrange her cups as an inverted
pentagram, symbol (in this place) of the triumph of matter over spirit.
    What is it that turns this card sour? Mars rules Scorpio and is very happy to
be there. Not only that: all this is in Geburah, the hometown, the sphere of Mars.
So where's the problem?
    The problem stems from the fact that Mars is too happy to be here. He gets him-
self too excited to indulge in foreplay. This makes Scorpio nervous. He ends up
prematurely blowing such a fiery blast upon the relationship that it retards what
might have otherwise been the slow processes of passionate decay that Scorpio uses
to devour and liberate her lovers. Who among us cannot understand this?
230                                         Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


      Water no longer pours into the cups; the lotus blossoms have been completely
blown away by the hot martial wind that has turned the sky red. The sea is now a
stagnating pool. Now we can see where the earlier small cards in this suit were
taking us. Love leads to Abundance, which (left uncontrolled) leads to Luxury,
which (left uncontrolled) leads to decadence, boredom, frustration and—
Disappointment.
      See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
The Small Cards                                                                      231


SIX OF CUPS
PLEASURE

(Sol in Scorpio)

10° to 20° Scorpio

November 2 to November 12

Original Title: Lord of Pleasure.

Golden Dawn Model: A hand appears from clouds
at the bottom of the card and holds a group of
stems of lotuses or water lilies, from which six flow-
ers bend, one over each cup. Water flows from these
flowers into the cups as if from a fountain. The cups
are not yet full.

Queen Scale for Tiphareth: Yellow (gold).

The Four Scales for Sol: Orange; Gold Yellow; Rich Amber; Amber, rayed Red.

The Four Scales for Scorpio: Green Blue; Dull Brown; Very dark Brown; Livid
indigo Brown.

Formula: 6 (Tiphareth) of Cups (Briah) + Sun in Scorpio = PLEASURE


Balance returns to the suit as the Six of Cups, Pleasure, finds a most delightful
home in Tiphareth, the sphere of the Sun. The Four and Five of Cups seem like
bad dreams (probably brought on by consuming too much rich food and wine),
and we now awaken to the giddy realization that we are the card that is the direct
reflection of the Ace of Cups on the Tree of Life. The Sun is outrageously happy
to be in Tiphareth and shines with double warmth and pleasantness on the sensu-
ous and fun-loving side of Scorpio. If this is the first card you draw in a tarot read-
ing, you may want to stop right there and quit while you're ahead. This is a terrific
card. Crowley agrees:


     Pleasure, in the title of this card, must be understood in its highest sense: it
     implies well-being, harmony of natural forces without effort or strain, ease,
     satisfaction. Foreign to the idea of the card is the gratification of natural or
     artificial desires. Yet it does represent emphatically the fulfillment of the
     sexual Will, as shown by the ruling Sephira, planet, element, and sign."
232                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


      The sea is alive with broad gentle waves, and the lotuses actually dance, leav-
ing stem trails of perfectly symmetrical patterns and arcs. Water is again pouring into
the cups from lotus blossoms, but, as yet, the cups are not filled. Four of the cups are
tilted and appear ready to fall, but they are pressed securely against the stems by
the generous water pressure from above.
      See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
The Small Cards                                                                                    233


SEVEN OF CUPS
DEBAUCH

(Venus in Scorpio)

20° to 30° Scorpio                                                                        Mi j

November 13 to November 22                              Le | aa 2 eH
Original Title: Lord of Illusionary Success.              iftot cor
                                                                bee     ate          '|       P
                                                                        LY           a
Golden Dawn Model: The cups are arranged as                 .   o

two descending triangles above a point: a hand           ab | NN 5 Val rik
holds lotus stems, which arise from a central lower                 _   4      =4-        =
cup. The hand is above this cup and below the            seh Ri) al                           ss
middle one. With the exception of the central lower     ~= “a5                ce 4
cup, each is overhung bya lotus flower, but no              ———— NE           ei A,
water falls from any of the flowers. All the cups are          =               :   i
empty.
Queen Scale for Netzach: Emerald.

The Four Scales for Venus: Emerald Green; Sky Blue; Early Spring Green;
Bright Rose or Cerise, rayed Pale Green.

The Four Scales for Scorpio: Green Blue; Dull Brown; Very dark Brown; Livid
Indigo Brown.

Formula: 7 (Netzach) of Cups (Briah) + Venus in Scorpio = DEBAUCH


Crowley is definitely not a fan of the Seven of Cups:


    This is one of the worst ideas that one can have; its mode is poison, its goal
    madness. It represents the delusion of Delirium Tremens and drug addic-
    tion; it represents the sinking into the mire of false pleasure. There is some-
    thing almost suicidal in this card.””


Just look at this card—if you can. Yuck! What happened to all that great Cup stuff
higher up on the Tree of Life? Doesn't sexy Venus like to show off in sexy Scorpio?
She does. She likes to show off everywhere! Venus, however, is not well dignified
in Scorpio and often embarrasses herself when she visits.
    You ask, shouldn’t she be happy in Netzach, the sphere of Venus? Sure she is!
She’s so happy she’s making herself sick. This is much-too-much of what was once
234                                             Understanding Aleister Crowley’s Thoth Tarot


a good thing and, this low on the tree and this far off balance, there isn't a single influ-
encing factor left to remind her the party's over.
      This card seems like the next logical step in the Abundance, Luxury,
Disappointment sequence. Three martinis is abundantly enough; four is just the
luxury of showing off; five is disappointing because you're not getting high any
more, you're just getting smashed. But after seven—oh dear! The Seven of Cups is
a stumbling dash to the lavatory just moments after you thought you were being
irresistible to an attractive stranger.
      See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
The Small Cards                                                                   235


EIGHT OF CUPS
INDOLENCE

(Saturn in Pisces)

0° to 10° Pisces

February 19 to February 28

Oniginal Title: Lord of Abandoned Success.

Golden Dawn Model: From clouds at the bottom
of the card a hand appears, holding the stems of
lotuses or water lilies. There are only two flowers
that bend over and fill to overflowing the two cen-
tral cups. The overflow pours into (but does not fill)
the three lowest cups. There are three cups above
the two central cups, which remain empty.

Queen Scale for Hod: Orange.

The Four Scales for Saturn: Indigo; Black; Blue-black; Black, rayed Blue.

The Four Sales for Pisces: Crimson (ultra Violet); Buff, flecked silver White;
Light Translucent pinkish Brown; Stone color.

Formula: 8 (Hod) of Cups (Briah) + Saturn in Pisces = INDOLENCE


Much to my wife's disappointment (this is her birthday card), Crowley didn't have
much nice to say about the Eight of Cups. In fact, he called it “the German Measles
of Christian Mysticism.”” and “the very apex of unpleasantness.”””
    Is it any wonder? This card has a bad attitude (Sorry, Dear). Saturn is a heavy
and hard-nosed downer and, this far down the Tree of Life, delicate Pisces doesn't
have enough juice left to put up any kind of fight. This card will have you “playin’
solitaire till dawn, with a deck of 51.”7
    Crowley's description of this unfortunate blending of forces is priceless:


    This card represents a party for which all preparations have been made; but
    the host has forgotten to invite the guests; or the caterers have not delivered
    the good cheer. There is this difference, though, that it is in some way or
    other the host’s own fault.?”
236                                          Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


      Harris's interpretation of Indolence is perfect—a stagnant pool, drooping blos-
soms. The top three cups and one at the bottom of the card are empty; the two in
the center are spilling half their contents back into the sea.
      See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
The Small Cards                                                                     237


NINE OF CUPS
HAPPINESS

(Jupiter in Pisces)

10° to 20° Pisces

March 1 to March 10

Original Title: Lord of Material Happiness.

Golden Dawn Model: A hand appears from clouds
at the bottom of the card holding the stem of
lotuses or water lilies, one flower of which over-
hangs each of nine cups arranged in three rows of
three.

Queen Scale for Yesod: Violet.

The Four Scales for Jupiter: Violet; blue; rich
Purple; Bright Blue, rayed Yellow.

The Four Sales for Pisces: Crimson (ultra Violet); Buff, flecked silver White;
Light Translucent pinkish Brown; Stone color.

Formula: 9 (Yesod) of Cups (Briah) + Jupiter in Pisces = HAPPINESS


Is everybody happy? Yes!
     See what happens when we return to the stability of the middle pillar? This is
one of the best cards in the deck. Pisces, being the mutable sign of water, tends to
stabilize the element. She is most welcome in Yesod, the sphere of the watery Moon.
Yesod is also the Foundation, the sephira that stabilizes the entire Tree of Life. This
provides a most cozy and satisfying environment for loveable Jupiter to happily
enjoy the good life as only Jupiter and his friends can.
    Jupiter also has an afÏnity to water. Chesed, the sphere of Jupiter, Crowley
afÏrms, “represents Water in its highest material manifestation.”
    Everybody is, literally, happy!
    Harris follows the color scales and pumps up the Golden Dawn model by
straightening her streams of flowing water as if they were spurting from the lotus
flowers and gushing under pressure into large-bowled cups. The whole image is
one of voluptuous, surreal Victorian clutter.There is hardly room for her to include
the symbols ofJupiter and Pisces at the top and bottom of the card.
    See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
238                                               Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


TEN OF CUPS
SATIETY

                                 (Mars in Pisces)

                                 20° to 30° Pisces

                                 March 11 to March 20

                                 Original Title: Lord of Perfected Happiness.

                                 Golden Dawn Model: A hand appears from clouds
                                 at the bottom of the card, holding the stem of lotus
                                 or water lilies whose flowers pour water into all the
                                 cups, which all spill over. The top cup is held side-
                                ways by another hand, and pours water into the
                                 left-hand upper cup. A single lotus flower rises
                                 above the top cup, and is the source of the water
                                 that fills it.

Queen Scale for Malkuth: Citrine; Olive; Russet; and Black.

The Four Scales for Mars: Scarlet; Red; Venetian Red; Bright Red, rayed azure
or emerald.

The Four Scales for Pisces: Crimson (ultra Violet); Buff, flecked silver White;
Light Translucent pinkish Brown; Stone color.

Formula: 10 (Malkuth) of Cups (Briah) + Mars in Pisces = SATIETY


Crowley advised Harris on the composition of this card, writing:


      The background; it ought to look menacing. There is something very sinis-
      ter about this card. It suggests the morbid hunger which springs from sur-
      feit. The craving of a drug addict is the idea. At the same time, of course, it
      is this final agony of descent into illusion which renders necessary the com-
      pletion of the circle by awakening the Eld of the All-Father.”
                                             —Crowley to Harris, December 19, 1939.


      Had enough? The Ten of Cups could have been filled with the realization of
the potential of the suit of Cups. Instead, it is just filled with the concept of fullness.
The cups have runneth over and are staining the carpet.” Crowley blames this on
Mars in Pisces:
The Small Cards                                                                239


    Mars is the gross, violent and disruptive force which inevitably attacks every
    supposed perfection. His energy displays the greatest possible contrast with
    that of Pisces, which is both peaceful and spiritualized.TM


    This is the end of the line for the suit of water. Harris ignores the Golden
Dawn model and coloring guidelines and creates a Tree of Life from ten rather dis-
turbed and tipsy cups.
    See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
240                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


TWO OF SWORDS
PEACE

                                (Moon in Libra)

                                0° to 10° Libra

                                September 23 to October 2

                                Original Title: Lord of Peace Restored.

                                Golden Dawn Model: Two hands appear from
                                clouds at the right and left side of the card. They
                                hold two swords like the air dagger of a Zelator
                                Adeptus Minor.The swords cross in the center of
                                the card. A red rose with five petals blooms where
                                the swords touch. The rose emits white rays.

                                Prince Scale for Chokmah: Blue pearl gray, like
                                mother of pearl.

The Four Scales for Moon: Blue; Silver; Cold Pale Blue; Silver, rayed Sky Blue.

The Four Scales for Libra: Emerald Green; Blue; Deep Blue-Green; Pale Green.

Formula: 2 (Chokmah) of Swords (Yetzirah) + Moon in Libra = PEACE


Harris has not strayed very far from the basic Golden Dawn model in this card.
She has replaced the red rose with a deep blue-green blossom (Libra), and she forms
a stylized Greek cross using the geometrical wings we first encountered on the
Princess of Swords. These wings also festoon the backgrounds of the other cards of
this suit.
      Astrologers tell us that people who were born with Moon in Libra criticize and
make judgments from a position of enviable equilibrium. They weigh every prob-
lem and proposition with the utmost fairness. This fortunate union of sign and
planet finds a predictably dignified home in Chokmah. The result is one of the
few cards in the suit of Swords that doesn’t evoke groans when it appears in a tarot
reading.
      That is not to say that it is all goodness and light. We must remember that the
natural vocation of a sword is to fight, to cut, to pierce, to kill. It is an instrument
of action. Just like the mind, just like the Ruach, the intellectual part of the soul, it
is in constant movement.
The Small Cards                                                                      241


    Eastern mystics tell us that the mind is the great enemy. If we are to achieve
profound levels of consciousness, the mind must be overcome. Fearful that its
existence and control will end, the mind resists these efforts at all costs. This is why
so many cards in the suit of Swords seem so frustrated, anxious, nervous, even
tortured.
    In the case of the Two of Swords, Peace, it seems we've dodged a bullet. We must
always remember, however, that for the sharp and dangerous sword, peace is just
an uncharacteristic and temporary interruption from war.
    See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
242                                          Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


THREE OF SWORDS
SORROW

                               (Saturn in Libra)

                               10° to 20° Libra

                               October 3 to October 12

                               Original Title: Lord of Sorrow.

                               Golden Dawn Model: Three hands holding three
                               swords appear from clouds at the bottom of the
                               card, The image is that of the Two of Swords, but
                               the right and left swords are violently parted by a
                               central third sword. The rose is destroyed and its
                               five petals are dispersed into the air.There are no
                               white rays.

                               Prince Scale for Binah: Dark Brown.

The Four Scales for Saturn: Indigo; Black; Blue-black; Black, rayed Blue.

The Four Scales for Libra: Emerald Green; Blue; Deep Blue-Green; Pale Green.

Formula: 3 (Binah) of Swords (Yetzirah) + Saturn in Libra = SORROW


Harris is strongly affected by the Three of Swords.


      Please don't frighten me with the Sword suit. 1 have obeyed in every way. I
      can’t see how they can be wrong. The 3 was a fair horror & great suffering.TM
                                             —Harris to Crowley, date uncertain.


      I wrote earlier that, because they reside in the supernal triad above the Abyss,
all the aces, twos, and threes are happy. Obviously Sorrow does not sound like a
happy card. It is very difÏcult for us to understand the nature of consciousness above
the Abyss, where the actuality of things does not exist. In this abstract atmosphere,
there are no things or even forms of things—nothing but pure potential. The “sorrow”
of this card is not the same kind of sorrow evoked by, say, the death of a loved one
or the loss of a lover. It is a profound state of consciousness that, from our below-
the-abyss point of view, we can only attempt to describe. Sorrow falls pitifully short
of an accurate description, but it is probably the best word the English language
can offer us.
The Small Cards                                                                243


    Ignoring for a moment the astrological aspects of the card, let’s consider the
unique Qabalistic factors that make the Three of Swords happy to be Sorrow.


  * Swords represent Yetzirah, the formative world—oh, but sorry! There can be
    no forms in Binah or anywhere above the Abyss.
  * Swords also represent Ruach, the human intellect—oh, but sorry! Intellect
    and reason cannot exist above the Abyss in Binah.


    Without forms or reason, the mind must give way to a consciousness higher than
itself. The Three of Swords represents the wondrous trance of sorrow that first
enlightened the Buddha. We should all be so lucky to draw Sorrow from the deck.
    See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
244                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley’s Thoth Tarot


FOUR OF SWORDS
TRUCE

                                (Jupiter in Libra)

                                20° to 30° Libra

                                October 13 to October 22

                                Original Title: Lord of Rest from Strife.

                                Golden Dawn Model: The Four of Swords is
                                exactly like the Two of Swords (including the rose
                                of five petals and the white rays), except the hands
                                that appear from clouds at the right and left hold
                                two swords each.

                                Prince Scale for Chesed: Deep Purple.

                                The Four Scales for Jupiter: Violet; Blue; rich
Purple; Bright Blue, rayed Yellow.

The Four Scales for Libra: Emerald Green; Blue; Deep Blue-Green; Pale Green.

Formula: 4 (Chesed) of Swords (Yetzirah) + Jupiter in Libra = TRUCE


The Four of Swords is perhaps the most beautiful of the small-card Swords. Harris
executes a textbook use of the color scales and offers us a portrait of balance and
order. She writes to Crowley: “I think it would be a good plan if you could arrange
to come here one day next week & see the Swords. I have a superstitious horror of
bringing them all unbalanced to London.”
      Chesed is the sphere ofJupiter and serves as a gracious but authoritative host to
Jupiter in Libra. Equilibrium and justice are definitely key words for this card, but
Crowley tells us that it also brings with it the “establishment of dogma, and the law
conceming it.”* Swords are weapons, and weapons discharge their design by virtue
of the disciplines of war, not of peace. The kind of “truce” the Four of Swords mon-
itors is a peace enforced by the threat of violence, and as such will be short lived.
     The four swords are arranged as a St. Andrew's cross, suggesting to Crowley
“Fixation and rigidity.” Their points meet at the center of a large rose of forty-nine
petals that Crowley tells us represents “social harmony.” It is the concord of con-
formity and compromise, however, that characterizes a culture that would rather
blindly surrender to authority than to face the challenges of liberty.
      See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
The Small Cards                                                                     245


FIVE OF SWORDS
DEFEAT

(Venus in Aquarius)

0° to 10° Aquarius

January 20 to January 29

Original Title: Lord of Defeat.

Golden Dawn Model: Three hands appear from
clouds at the bottom card. The right and left hands
hold two swords each, the center hand one. The
image is that of the Three of Swords, but, in this
case, the two swords to the right and to the left are
violently parted by a central fifth sword. The rose is
destroyed and its five petals are dispersed into the
air. There are no white rays.

Prince Scale for Geburah: Bright Scarlet.

The Four Scales for Venus: Emerald Green; Sky Blue; Early Spring Green;
Bright Rose or Cerise, rayed Pale Green.

The Four Scales for Aquarius: Violet; Sky Blue; Bluish Mauve; White, tinged
Purple.

Formula: 5 (Geburah) of Swords (Yetzirah) + Venus in Aquarius = DEFEAT


This card presents five unmatched, bent, and damaged swords forming an averse pen-
tagram. This pentagram of Defeat is projected upona field of Harris's geometric and
wildly asymmetric wings, some of which form swastikas. As this card was painted
at the very height of England's struggle with Nazi Germany, it is easy to speculate
that Harris was either consciously or unconsciously projecting magical defeat on
this hated enemy. Her concern with the design is clear in her words to Crowley: “I
only hope the Swords are alright for I can't do them again. I have followed your
instructions with meticulous care.”*°
    Popular opinion holds that the averse pentagram is an evil symbol. The Golden
Dawn even cautioned its initiates never to use it magically. Be that as it may, it is
the pinnacle of superstition to believe that any symbol, in and of itself, can be either
good or evil. The averse pentagram can be used to symbolize an infinite number
of perfectly innocuous concepts. However, in this card it really does mean trouble.
246                                         Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


      Venus rules Aquarius and, for a moment, she is very happy to have him as her
date. After all, they're both pacifists. They are a friendly, mellow, and sentimental
couple. Unfortunately, this sensitive pair has shown up at the wrong party. A ter-
rible fight has broken out in a very rough and well-armed area of Qabalahville—
Geburah, the house of Mars, which is located in Yetzirah (the world of Swords).
     Naturally, Venus and Aquarius volunteer to be peacemakers, but they are just
too nice, too peaceful, too weak to handle themselves in this violent neighborhood.
The inevitable result is Defeat. Sorry kids. I hear things are quieter down in
Tiphareth.
      See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
 The Small Cards                                                                        247


 SIX OF SWORDS
 SCIENCE

 (Mercury in Aquarius)

 10° to 20° Aquarius

 January 30 to February 8

 Original Title: Lord of Earned Success.

 Golden Dawn Model: Two hands appear from
 clouds at the right and left side of the card. They
 each hold three swords like the air dagger of a
 Zelator Adeptus Minor.The swords cross in the
 center of the card. A red rose with five petals blooms
 where the swords touch. The rose emits white rays.

 Prince Scale for Tiphareth: Rich Salmon.

 The Four Scales for Mercury: Yellow; Purple; Grey; Indigo, rayed Violet.

 The Four Scales for Aquarius: Violet; Sky Blue; Bluish Mauve; White, tinged
_ Purple.

 Formula: 6 (Tiphareth) of Swords (Yetzirah) + Mercury in Aquarius = SCIENCE


 In chapter 8, we were introduced to the small Rose Cross at the heart of the Hermetic
 Rose Cross. I presumptuously labeled it the Rose Cross of Being. In the Six of
 Disks, this figure is found at the very center of the card, and six matched and bal-
 anced swords focus their powers of analysis and discrimination upon the mysteries
 of being. This is Science.
      The conservative beauty of this card announces that the shining balance of
 Tiphareth brings a much-needed measure of nobility and clear-headedness to the
 suit of Swords. The formula that creates the character of this card couldn't be more
 auspicious for the suit of Swords. In the human soul, the counterpart ofYetzirah is
 the Ruach, or the intellect. On the Tree of Life, the center of the Ruach radiates from
 Tiphareth. Finally, an air planet, Mercury, finds itself in the fixed air sign of Aquarius.
      Someone with Mercury in Aquarius in his or her natal horoscope is said to
 have a keen, analytical mind and an extraordinary ability to concentrate. He or she
 is also intensely curious and enjoys examining both sides of a question. Sounds like
 a scientist, doesn’t it?
      See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
248                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


SEVEN OF SWORDS
FUTILITY

                                (Moon in Aquarius)

          &    :       ¥        20° to 30° Aquarius

      2    |       |       $    February 9 to February 18
 Se \\ | / f ;.£                Original Title: Lord of Unstable Effort.
      QXW FZ                    Golden Dawn Model: Two hands appear from
          YW           7        clouds at the right and left side of the card. They
              NZ                each hold three swords like the air dagger of a
                                Zelator Adeptus Minor. A third hand holds up a
                                single sword in the center. The points of all the
                                swords touch each other, the central sword not alto-
                                gether dividing them. The rose of five petals
                                blooms on the blade of the center sword.

Prince Scale for Netzach: Bright Yellow Green.

The Four Scales for Moon: Blue; Silver; Cold Pale Blue; Silver, rayed Sky Blue.

The Four Scales for Aquarius: Violet; Sky Blue; Bluish Mauve; White, tinged
Purple.

Formula: 7 (Netzach) of Swords (Yetzirah) + Moon in Aquarius = FUTILITY


For me, the Seven of Swords is often difÏcult to interpret in a tarot reading. One
would think that a Sword card in Netzach would be absolutely awful. There are,
however, embedded complexities in our formula that relieve this card of some of
the more tortuous burdens that afÒict the other sevens. For example, the very name
of the seventh sephira is Victory. This may seem like grasping at straws, but Swords
resonate well to words like victory. The Moon in Aquarius adds elements of change
and the possibility of compromise. Crowley observes: “It is like a rheumatic boxer
trying to “come back” after being out of the ring for years.” Nonetheless, it is well
to remember that, sometimes, even old boxers get in a lucky punch.
      Harris chose to illustrate this as a planetary battle: six planets versus the Sun.
Look closely at the swords. The hilts of the six small swords arrayed in a crescent
near the top of the card carry the symbols of (from left to right) the Moon, Venus,
Mars, Jupiter, Mercury, and Saturn. The large central sword is the Sun itself, out-
numbered and battle-scarred. The entire arrangement, however, is orderly and
The Small Cards                                                            249


restrained, almost suggestive of a moment when a negotiated settlement might be


    I wouldn't bet on it.
    See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
250                                            Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


EIGHT OF SWORDS
INTERFERENCE

                                (Jupiter in Gemini)

                                0° to 10° Gemini

                                May 21 to May 31

                                Original Title: Lord of Shortened Force.

                                Golden Dawn Model: Four hands appear from
                                clouds, each holding two swords, points upward; all
                                the points touch near the top of the card. Hands
                                issue, two at each bottom angle of the card. The
                                rose is reestablished in the center.

                                Prince Scale for Hod: Red-russet.

                                The Four Scales for Jupiter: Violet; Blue; rich
Purple; Bright Blue, rayed Yellow.

The Four Scales for Gemini: Orange; Pale Mauve; New Yellow leather; Reddish
Grey inclined to Mauve.

Formula: 8 (Hod ) of Swords (Yetzirah) + Jupiter in Gemini = INTERFERENCE


Harris outdid herself in strict adherence to the color scales in this card. One would
not expect a marriage of these colors to appear in art prior to the psychedelic black-
light styles of the 1960s. The blades of the swords seem actually to glow in the dark.
As in most of the small cards of this suit, the swords appear upon of field of styl-
ized wings—here looking almost like pinwheels.
     Actually, this card is not as bad as it looks or its title implies. Jupiter in Gemini
indicates an element of luck in intellectual pursuits. Hod is the sphere of Mercury,
who rules Gemini. As it does to the eights of the other suits, however, Hod’s imbal-
anced and lowly position on the Tree of Life throws a wet blanket on what otherwise
might have been a fortunate coupling. There is not enough Mercurial energy left to
put up much of a fight, and in the suit of Swords, fighting is what it is all about.
Crowley says, “the Will is constantly thwarted by accidental interference.”TM
    The Eight of Swords does not show us much patience or persistence. If its influ-
ence is to be overcome, those qualities will need to be developed and introduced into
the equation. Otherwise, everything will most definitely serve to interfere.
      See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
The Small Cards                                                                                                                           251


NINE OF SWORDS
CRUELTY

(Mars in Gemini)                                                                   .                                                      *    ie


                                                                                                                       agg                oA °
10° to 20° Gemini                                              *   _s —   “*
                                                                                       -   2   i
                                                                                                        tee       ee
                                                                               ;

                                                                                           -
                                                                                                       fax
                                                                                                       ar
                                                                                                                         ‘4 ae)
                                                                                                                             f                 -

                                                                                                         2)                  a”                af
                                                                                       r                     iJ                  a        i)       ee

June 1 to June 10                                                                                             ih                     3
                                                                                                   :              \                  WI


                                                                                                             PI                           (
Original Title: Lord of Despair and Cruelty.                                                                  :


Golden Dawn Model: From out of clouds on the
left and right, four hands appear, each holding two
swords nearly upright but with the points falling
away from each other. From the bottom of the card,
a fifth hand appears holding a ninth sword upright
in the center, as if it had struck them apart. No rose
at all is shown, seemingly having been utterly
destroyed.

Prince Scale for Yesod: Very dark Purple.

The Four Scales for Mars: Scarlet; Red; Venetian Red; Bright Red, rayed Azure
or Emerald.

The Four Scales for Gemini: Orange; Pale Mauve; New Yellow leather; Reddish
Grey inclined to Mauve.

Formula: 9 (Yesod) of Swords (Yetzirah) + Mars in Gemini = CRUELTY


Oh, dear! Nobody expects the Spanish Inquisition! If you have a hangover, don’t
look at the Nine of Swords. You won’t be ready to deal with this one. Who knows
what Harris was doing with the colors, but she succeeded in making them perfectly
nauseating. As if to underscore the degeneration of the suit, the pinwheel wings
are being washed down the wall of the background by what look like drops of poison.
The whole scene induces dizziness. I can almost taste the drops of rusty blood drip-
ping from the swords.
    It is kind of a surprise to find this horrible mess in middle-pillar Yesod. After
all, the other nines are perfectly lovely fellows. But even the balance and stability of
Yesod can’t come to the rescue of all-action Mars—in all-talk Gemini—in the
lowest burned-out region ofYetzirah, the world of thought. Watch out! It is, Crowley
warns, “agony of mind.”””
252                                         Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


    The only outlet for expression for this card is just ugly meanness. There is not
even enough subtlety of mind left, Crowley points out, to take sadistic pleasure
from its own cruelty: “Consciousness has fallen into a realm unenlightened by
reason. This is the world of the unconscious primitive instincts, of the psychopath,
of the fanatic.”**
      See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
The Small Cards                                                                  253


TEN OF SWORDS
RUIN

(Sol in Gemini)

20° to 30° Gemini

June 11 to June 20

Original Title: Lord of Ruin.

Golden Dawn Model: Four hands holding eight
swords, as in the Nine of Swords, the points falling
away from each other. Two hands hold two swords
crossed in the center, as though their junction had
disunited the others. No rose, flower, or bud is
shown.

Prince Scale for Malkuth: Citrine; Olive; Russet;
and Black; all with Gold, flecked Black.

The Four Scales for Sol: Orange; Gold Yellow; Rich Amber; Amber, rayed Red.

The Four Scales for Gemini: Orange; Pale Mauve; New Yellow leather; Reddish
Grey inclined to Mauve.

Formula: 10 (Malkuth) of Swords (Yetzirah) + Sol in Gemini = RUIN


Can you find ten swords in the Ten of Swords? It’s very difÏcult. Crowley tries to
help us:


    The hilts of the Swords occupy the positions of the Sephiroth, but points
    One to Five and Seven to Nine touch and shatter the bright central sword
    (six) which represents the Sun, the Heart, the child of Chokmah and Binah.
    The tenth sword is also in splinters.”


There are three swords that form the middle pillar, the lowest having a crescent
Moon on the handle. The next sword is placed upon the blade of the first and has
an orb as part of its handle. The blade of the second sword is place upon the heart-
shaped pommel of the central sword, whose blade is broken into three pieces.
    It is difÏcult to put a good spin on this card. Harris herself reports, “I have
done the 10 of Swords & promptly Russia takes up arms.””* Along with the other
tens, the Ten of Swords can't degenerate any lower without completely changing
254                                          Understanding Aleister Crowleys Thoth Tarot


suits. Sol in Mercury-ruled Gemini brings a complete identification with the mind
and the intellect, which, in this card, are in the very process of being destroyed. “It
is the ruin of the Intellect,” Crowley intones, “and even of all mental and moral
qualities.” Ouch!
      See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
The Small Cards                                                                          255


TWO OF DISKS
CHANGE

(Jupiter in Capricorn)

0° to 10° Capricorn

December 22 to December 30

Original Title: Lord of Harmonious Change.

Golden Dawn Model: In the center, a green and
gold serpent with its tail in its mouth forms a figure
8. A hand appears from clouds on the left side of
card and grasps the serpent where the two loops
intersect. Within each loop is a disk, similar to that
of the ace. There are no roses in this card.


                            °o

                            °o


Princess Scale for Chokmah: White-flecked red, Blue and Yellow.

The Four Scales for Jupiter: Violet; Blue; rich Purple; Bright Blue, rayed yellow.

The Four Scales for Capricorn: Indigo; Black; Blue-black; Cold Dark Grey,
nearing Black.

Formula: 2 (Chokmah) of Disks (Assiah) + Jupiter in Capricorn = CHANGE


Even though Jupiter and Capricorn are not usually happy with each other, this high
up on the Tree of Life, their differences are more or less forgiven. Crowley calls this card
“the picture of the complete manifested Universe, in respect of its dynamics.””
     Like the twos of the other suits, this card, not the ace, represents the first man-
ifestation of its element. Disks being earth and, as we recall, earth being the throne
of spirit, we have in a very real sense completed a great cosmic circuit. “[H]aving got
to the bottom, Crowley explains, “one immediately comes out again at the top.
Hence, the card manifests the symbolism of the serpent of the endless band.”**
Crowley sings in his Liber LXV:


     Then I beheld myself compassed about with the Infinite Circle of Emerald
     that encloseth the Universe.”
256                                            Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


     As if to suggest the nuclei of the first dividing cells of what will soon be the mate-
rial universe, two yin-yangs whirl in the center of the two coils of the serpent; the
top rotates to the left and contains within itself the symbols of fire and water; the
bottom one rotates to the right and contains within itself the symbols of air and
earth. Harris tells Crowley that she paid particular attention to the colors:

      No 2 Disks is on the stocks, is the serpent’s eye to be red? It is a bit awkward
      as there are several colours introduced in the card which do not belong to
      Jupiter and Capricorn, I mean the 4 elements colours and they make inhar-
      monious patches. Did you say anything about jewels on the serpent? I think
      you will like him.”*”


      See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
The Small Cards                                                                  257


THREE OF DISKS
WORK

(Mars in Capricorn)

10° to 20° Capricorn

December 31 to January 9

Original Title: Lord of Material Works.

Golden Dawn Model: From clouds at the bottom
of the card, a hand appears holding a branch of a
rose tree. Three disks are arranged as an upright
equilateral triangle. Crowning the top disk are two
white rosebuds. The two lower disks appear right
and left at the tips of green leaves.

                            o

                        o       9°


Princess Scale for Binah: Grey, flecked Pink.

The Four Scales for Mars: Scarlet; Red; Venetian Red; Bright Red, rayed Azure
or Emerald.

The Four Scales for Capricorn: Indigo; Black; Blue-black; Cold Dark Grey,
nearing Black.

Formula: 3 (Binah) of Disks (Assiah) + Mars in Capricorn = WORK


Although in The Book of Thoth Crowley consistently refers to this card as Work, the
title that appears on Lady Harris's painting (and consequently the published edi-
tions of the Thoth Tarot) is Works. In either case, the factors that determine its
character (Binah of Assiah, Mars in Capricorn) make this card, among all the
abstract supernal triad small cards, the most un-abstract. In a very real way, the
Three of Disks is the material heart of the three-stroke engine that drives the uni-
verse that we discussed in Atu X. Crowley says it is “the material establishment of
the idea of the Universe, the determination of its basic form.”TM
    The image is an aerial view of a pyramid or tetrahedron firmly fixed on a des-
olate desert representing the great sea of Binah. The gray sand dunes seem to have
been formed by blasts of energy emanating from the structure, which itself is sup-
258                                         Understanding Aleister Crowley’s Thoth Tarot


ported by three great wheels. Although they are very small and difÏcult to see, the
symbols of the alchemical elements mercury, sulfur, and salt appear in the hubs of
the three wheels, suggesting the eternal universe-sustaining competition of the
three gunas of the Hindu system.”
      See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
The Small Cards                                                                 259


FOUR OF DISKS
POWER

(Sol in Capricorn)

20° to 30° Capricorn

January 10 to January 19

Original Title: Lord of Earthly Power.

Golden Dawn Model: From clouds at the bottom
of the card, a hand appears holding a branch of a
rose tree. There are no flowers or buds other than
one white rose in the center in full bloom. Disks are
arranged as if on the points of a square.


                       o      Oo


                       o      oO


Princess Scale for Chesed: Deep Azure, flecked Yellow.

The Four Scales for Sol: Orange; Gold Yellow; Rich Amber; Amber, rayed Red.

The Four Scales for Capricorn: Indigo; Black, Blue-black; Cold Dark Grey,
nearing Black.

Formula: 4 (Chesed) of Disks (Assiah) + Sol in Capricorn = POWER


This card is well named. It is Sol in Capricorn, and to the ancients, the greatest
display of celestial power occurred each year when the Sun entered Capricorn and
conquered death by reversing its southward plunge into darkness. In The Book of
Thoth, Crowleys describes how “Chesed shows the establishment of the Universe
in three dimensions, that is, below the Abyss.”*° In “The Rite of Saturn,” he calls
it “The Fortress that is upon the Frontier of the Abyss.” This is a perfect descrip-
tion of the Four of Disks.
    To properly view this card, we must imagine ourselves hovering hundreds of feet
above a foursquare walled citadel surrounded by a wide moat. We are approaching
from the bottom of the card and are not yet above dead center. Four tall watch-
towers crowned with battlements displaying the symbols of the elements rise from
the corners and tower far above the walls. The main entrance to the fortress is seen
at the bottom of the card; a fortified bridge crosses the moat. From this angle, we
260                                          Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


can only see one other entrance, a tiny opening (that does not lead to a bridge) in
the opposite wall. Similar openings may exist in the walls on the right and left, but,
from our aerial position, it is impossible to tell. However,we are tantalized by what
appear to be roads leading up to the moat from the three other quarters, possibly an
indication of other openings. The imagery of this card certainly leaves us with many
mysteries unsolved.
      See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
The Small Cards                                                                 261


FIVE OF DISKS
WORRY

(Mercury in Taurus)

0° to 10° Taurus

April 21 to April 30

Original Title: Lord of Material Trouble.

Golden Dawn Model: From clouds at the bottom
of the card, a hand appears holding a branch of a
white rose tree. The roses are falling, leaving no
buds on the tree. Four disks similar to the ace are
arranged
     in the form of a square with a fifth disk in
the center.


                       o     °O
                           °o
                       o        9°


Princess Scale for Geburah: Red, flecked Black.

The Four Scales for Mercury: Yellow; Purple; Grey; Indigo, rayed Violet.

The Four Scales for Taurus: Red Orange; Deep Indigo; Deep warm Olive; Rich
Brown.

Formula: 5 (Geburah) of Disks (Assiah) + Mercury in Taurus = WORRY


Despite Mercury's active nature and Taurus’s tendency to be a bit sluggish, this is
not an overly difÏcult match. People with this aspect in their natal horoscopes are
often very patient, practical, and conservative. However, Geburah throws a dis-
turbing and stressful monkeywrench into the mechanism of this otherwise stable
device. The natural result is worry, the kind of worry that has you asking, “Am I
being pulled into a predicament I can't get out of? Am I in over my head? Will I be
crushed by the blind momentumof this situation?
    The surface of this card cannot contain the full images of five ponderous gear
wheels laid one upon another like the inner workings of a huge and grotesque clock.
What appear as five disks in the center of the card are actually only the hubs of
these massive wheels. The five hubs are arranged as an averse pentagram, each con-
262                                            Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


taining one of the five Hindu tattva symbols   of the elements: red triangleof fire, silver
crescent of water, blue circle of air,yellow square of earth, and the black egg of spirit.
If we look closely, we see that the black egg of spirit is upon the downward point
of the pentagram. It is clear that the Five of Disks is pointing to the more nasty
meaning of the averse pentagram, that of the triumph of matter over spirit.
      See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
The Small Cards


SIX OF DISKS
SUCCESS

(Moon in Taurus)

10° to 20° Taurus

May 1 to May 10

Original Title: Lord of Material Success.

Golden Dawn Model: From clouds at the bottom
of the card, a hand appears holding a rose branch
with white roses and buds, each of which touches
a disk. Disks are arranged in two columns of three
each, thus:

                        0     °o
                              °o
                        oo    °o


Princess Scale for Tiphareth: Gold Amber.

The Four Scales for Moon: Blue; Silver; Cold Pale Blue; Silver, rayed Sky Blue.

The Four Scales for Taurus: Red Orange; Deep Indigo; Deep warm Olive; Rich
Brown.

Formula: 6 (Tiphareth) of Disks (Assiah) + Moon in Taurus = SUCCESS


All things considered, things don't get any better than this in the suit of Disks. The
Moon is exalted in Taurus and eminently happy to be there. As change is the Moon's
primary characteristic, however, we may not have much time to enjoy our success.
On the other hand, Tiphareth, as always, comes to the rescue:


    It represents consciousness in its most harmonized and balanced form; defi-
    nitely in form, not only in idea, as in the case of the number Two. In other
    words, the Son is an interpretation of the Father in terms of the mind.


    For this reason, it is interesting to compare this card with the Ace of Disks,
because, in a very real sense, the Six of Disks is an interpretation of the Ace of Disks
in terms of the mind. In this, the most earthy and material suit, six (Tiphareth)
264                                          Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


applies its noble and stable influence toward practical ends—it is a brief reward for
the tireless (if somewhat mindless) hands-on labor of the entrepreneur.
      The basic image is that of the hexagram we found on the white section of the
lower arm of the Hermetic Rose Cross (see chapter 8)—the Sun surrounded by
the other six planets of the ancients. Here the Sun of Tiphareth is represented by
the rose of forty-nine petals crucified upon a cross of five squares. This device, long
associated with the Sun in magical and Masonic symbolism, is surrounded by three
concentric rings of golden yellow, salmon-pink, and amber, which, in some repro-
ductions, are hard to see.
      In a tarot reading, this card acts somewhat like a Midas touch—bringing to
neighboring cards the prospect of actually manifesting their qualities on the mate-
rial plane.
      See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
The Small Cards                                                                   265


SEVEN OF DISKS
FAILURE

(Saturn in Taurus)

20° to 30° Taurus

May 11 to May 20

Original Title: Lord of Success Unfulfilled.

Golden Dawn Model: From clouds at the bottom
of the card, a hand appears holding a rose branch.
There are only five buds, which overhang, but do
not touch the five uppermost disks. The disks are
arranged thus:


                       o        °¢O
                           °o
                       o        oO
                       o        °O


Princess Scale for Netzach: Olive, flecked Gold.

The Four Scales for Saturn: Indigo; Black; Blue-black; Black, rayed Blue.

The Four Scales for Taurus: Red Orange; Deep Indigo; Deep warm Olive; Rich
Brown.

Formula: 7 (Netzach) of Disks (Assiah) + Saturn in Taurus = FAILURE


This card presents an image of cold, stark beauty. That, I’m afraid, is the best thing
that can be said about it. Try as I may, I can't find one kind word from Crowley
concerning Failure. But honestly, have any of the sevens really thrilled us? We have
to hand it to Lady Harris, though. She did a marvelous job of setting seven leaden
coins (“They suggest bad money,” Crowleys explains.”’) struck with the symbols
of Saturn and Taurus in a world of dead and blackened vegetation. They form the
geomantic figure Rubeus, which Crowley describes as “the most ugly and menac-
ing of the Sixteen.”
    One look at our formula tells us we are in for trouble. Netzach, the sphere
of dreamy-eyed prima donna Venus has, as Crowley puts it, “its customary enfee-
bling effect.” And cold, heavy Saturn, in slow, earthy Taurus adds jack-booted
266                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


insult to unimaginative injury. Crowley summarizes the dark imagery of the
card:


      There is no effort here; not even dream; the stake has been thrown down,
      and it is lost. That is all Labour itself is abandoned; everything is sunk in
      sloth.”


      When the Seven of Disks shows up in a tarot reading, you better hope your
question was “What's going to happen to my worst enemy?”
      See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
The Small Cards                                                                  267


EIGHT OF DISKS
PRUDENCE

(Sol in Virgo)

0° to 10° Virgo

August 23 to September 1

Original Title: Lord of Prudence.

Golden Dawn Model: From clouds at the bottom
of the card, a hand appears grasping a branch of a
rose tree with four white roses on it. They touch
only the four lowermost disks. Leaves touch the
four uppermost disks. The disks are arranged thus:


                        0000   0000


Princess Scale for Hod: Yellowish-Brown, flecked White.

The Four Scales for Sol: Orange; Gold Yellow; Rich Amber; Amber, rayed Red.

The Four Scales for Virgo: Green (yellowish); Slate Grey; Green Grey; Plum
color.

Formula: 8 (Hod) of Disks (Assiah) + Sol in Virgo = PRUDENCE


Why is the Eight of Disks, Prudence, so inoffensive, while the Seven of Disks,
Failure, is so perfectly awful? Both cards are low on the Tree of Life, and off the
middle pillar. The formula explains it all.
    Hod is the sphere of Mercury. Mercury both rules and is exalted in Virgo.
Virgo is the mutable zodiac sign (and therefore the stabilizing influence) of Earth.
Earth is the element of Assiah and the suit of Disks. (Isn't this cozy?) And finally,
the Sun radiates its life-giving rays upon all this mental (Mercury) fertility
(Virgo/earth).
    Of course, everything isn’t perfect. The number eight position is still unbal-
anced and weak. There are enough mitigating factors, however, to make Crowley
comment that this card “signifies intelligence lovingly applied to material matters,
especially those of the agriculturist, the artificer and the engineer.”""
268                                         Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


      The disks are plum-colored blossoms of a thick-stalked tree firmly planted in
the earth. Like the disks in the Golden Dawn model, they are arranged to suggest
the figure Populus, which is one of two geomantic symbols representing the Moon.
In all candor, I am unsure why this is so. Perhaps because of the Moons association
with the planting of crops.
    This card is well named, for prudence is a passive activity. It is calculating.
Plant and wait. Wait and see. Bet—but onlyif you've fixed the game.
      See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
The Small Cards                                                                   269


NINE OF DISKS
GAIN

(Venus in Virgo)

10° to 20° Virgo

September 2 to September 11

Original Title: Lord of Material Gain.

Golden Dawn Model: From clouds at the bottom
of the card, a hand appears holding a rose branch
with nine white roses, each of which touchesa disk.
The disks are arranged thus:

                       o       oO
                       o       oO
                           o
                       o       oO
                       o       oO


Princess Scale for Yesod: Citrine, flecked azure.

The Four Scales for Venus: Emerald Green; Sky Blue; Early Spring Green;
Bright Rose or Cerise, rayed Pale Green.

The Four Scales for Virgo: Green (yellowish); Slate Grey; Green Grey; Plum
color.

Formula: 9 (Yesod) of Disks (Assiah) + Venus in Virgo = GAIN


Oh, how happy I am to see this card when the question concerns material matters!
I don't care how unspiritual it sounds, I love this card! Six small coins, stamped
with remarkably detailed and imaginative personifications of the planets, surround
a large unmarked solar orb that is interlaced with two companion disks of the same
size. Few cards of the Thoth Tarot bear less resemblance to Crowley’s description
in The Book of Thoth than this one. I have to conclude that his words were part of his
original instructions to Harris and not an account of the finished product.
    Be that as it may, the Nine of Disks is a balanced and beautiful interpretation
of what most people on this planet think of as good luck. Crowley even uses the
words “good luck” twice in his comments:
270                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


      This card is ruled by Venus in Virgo. It shows good luck attending material
      affairs, favour and popularity . . . the mingling of “good luck and good man-
      agement.”*”


      Yesod of Assiah is such a low position in the lowest of the four Qabalistic
worlds that its lowness is actually an asset. We are talking big-time payoff on the
material plane, and we are blissfully insensitive to concerns and anxieties that plagued
us throughout the cards of the other suits. “The suit of Disks,” Crowley observes,
“is much too dull to care; it reckons up its winnings; it does not worry its head about
whether anything is won when all is won.”*”
      See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.
The Small Cards                                                                      271


TEN OF DISKS
WEALTH

(Mercury in Virgo)

20° to 30° Virgo

September 12 to September 22

Original Title: Lord of Wealth.

Golden Dawn Model: From clouds at the bottom
of the card, a hand appears holding the branch of a
rose tree whose roses touch all the disks. No buds,
however, are shown. The disks are arranged thus:


                        o       oO
                            +
                        o       oO
                        o       oO
                            o
                        o       oO


Princess Scale for Malkuth: Black, rayed with Yellow.

The Four Scales for Mercury: Yellow; Purple; Grey; Indigo, rayed Violet.

The Four Scales for Virgo: Green (yellowish); Slate Grey; Green Grey; Plum
color.

Formula: 10 (Malkuth) of Disks (Assiah) + Mercury in Virgo = WEALTH


The Ten of Disks represents the climax of the descent of matter and is the signal
for the redintegration by spirit. Crowley calls this card “a hieroglyph of the cycle
of regeneration.” It is, after all, the last tarot card. It represents the lowest sphere
(Malkuth-Earth) of the lowest Qabalistic world (Assiah-the material plane). The
tens of the other suits have somewhere to go. They simply cooperate with gravity
and degenerate into the next lower suit. For the Ten of Disks, there is no place to
descend, no place to grow, no place to go. The Ten of Disks is forced to do some-
thing that no other small card is called upon to do. From its position at the bottom
of the cosmos, it has somehow to form a link with the secret of creation, then actu-
ally reincarnate fresh and new at the very top of the tarot cycle.
272                                            Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


      In other words, it must regenerate the world. That's some trick, and it's going
to take the biggest trickster in the universe to help pull it off. But let’s first take a
look at the card.
      Lady Harris’s interpretation is almost comically poignant: a Tree of Life made
entirely of massive and heavy coins, its Malkuth bulging at the bottom as if the
forces and energies of all the tarot cards, all the sephiroth and paths, all the Qabalistic
worlds have settled into it like the tired sediment of the entire universe. For lack
of a more gentile allusion, this card is the portrait of cosmic constipation. A mag-
ical laxative will need to be administered to prevent this stagnant wealth of energy,
experience, and matter from putrefying and poisoning the body.
      Is there a doctor in the house?
      Yes! The best doctor in the universe—the god of physicians and magicians,
the god who, tradition informs us, invented the tarot—Thoth-Hermes-Mercury!
      This is perfect! For a job like this, his credentials are amazing. First of all, as
Mercury, the Magus, he knows his way around the supernal triad. (Remember that
the path of Mercury is above the Abyss and joins Kether to Binah.) As Hermes,
he descended to the lowest region of the Land of the Dead and returned to Olympus
with Persephone to regenerate the cycle of seasons. If he could do that, jump-
starting the Ten of Disks is going to be a piece of cake! His greatest credential is that
he is Thoth—the inventor and sustainer of this entire tarot universe.”
      As if to attract Mercury's attention so that he may perform this most necessary
magick, Harris painted this card as a veritable invocation of Mercury. All the sephi-
roth but one bear an image or word sacred to Mercury:


  * Kether—we find the most common symbol of the planet Mercury;
  ¢ Chokmah—the symbol of Mercury as the Magus (Note that the right-
      angled positions of the arms are identical to the gesture made by the Magus
      in Atu I.);
  * Binah—the symbol of alchemical Mercury;
  ¢ Chesed—the letter Pa, the Enochian equivalent of the letter “B” (Harris
    associated this with the Hebrew letter Beth which is assigned to Mercury);
  * Geburah—the Hebrew letter Beth;
  ¢ Tiphareth—the name of Raphael (written in Hebrew), the ruling angel of
      Mercury;
      Netzach—the eight-pointed star of Mercury;
      Hod—the hexagram within the hexagon, symbol of the Sun (see below);
      Yesod—the Pythagorean Tetractys;
      Malkuth—the Mercurial caduceus made from the three mother letters of the
      Hebrew alphabet.
The Small Cards                                                                      273


    Why do all the sephiroth contain an image of Mercury except Hod, the sphere
of Mercury itself? That is a very good question. Crowley mentions it as being the
key to this remarkable regenerative process:


    These disks are inscribed with various symbols of mercurial character, except
    that the coin in the place of Hod (Mercury) on the Tree is marked with the
    cipher of the Sun. This indicates the only possibility of issue from the
    impasse produced by the exhaustion of all the elemental forces.“


    I take this to mean that, at this stage of the game, Mercury needs inspiration
and direction. Crowley said it most succinctly:


    When wealth accumulates beyond a certain point, it must either become
    completely inert and cease to be wealth, or call in the aid of intelligence to
    use it rightly. . . . In this way, Carnegie establishes a Library, Rockefeller
    endows Research, simply because there is nothing else to do.”


    By plugging in the Sun in the sphere of Mercury, in a Tree of Life otherwise
loaded with Mercury, Harris is calling in the aid of intelligence to give this card
the spiritual integrity necessary to regenerate the world and become the ultimate
cosmic philanthropist.
    See chapter 20 for the general divinatory meanings of this card.


                                         ©

                      How I should like to do them all again.?""
                       —Harris to Crowley, date uncertain.
                        CHAPTER TWENTY

                                             Ga)
    METHOD OF DIVINATION AND THE
               MEANINGS OF THE CARDS


    All divination resembles an attempt by a man born blind to obtain sight by getting
     blind drunk.”


     The cards are not to be sold without the book. Ifthe book can be printed without
     wllustrations tt need not cost more than £300. IfLady Harris likes, she can give it
    away with the cards, I do not want any money out of it: and she can say she wrote it, I
    don't care. But I will not allow the cards
                                            to be issued
                                                       so that they can be used
                                                                             only for
    gambling orfortune-telling.TM
                  —Crowley, Legal memorandum regarding “Stipend,” date uncertain.


You may think it odd (after I have written so much about things like projective
geometry, the Golden Dawn, changing Aeons, desert visions, the Hermetic Rose
Cross, the Tree of Life, color scales, guardian angels, and the magical, alchemical,
and Qabalistic intricacies of the Thoth Tarot) that I appear to have such precious
little to say about the use of the cards in divination. I assure you this is not because
I wish to denigrate the tarot’s potential as a divinatory device or discourage its use
as such. On the contrary, I use the cards for divination, Crowley used the cards for
divination, and many
                  of the most gifted tarot readers in the world
                                                             use the Thoth Tarot
for divination.
    Throughout this book,I have tried to remain true to the promise of its title. I
know. I probably slipped in a few places here and there and stuck in a little too
much DuQuette. But, for the most part, I believe I’ve been a faithful Crowley deliv-
ery system, and I do not intend to spoil that now by introducing Lon Milo
DuQuette’s subjective thoughts on tarot spreads and the divinatory meanings of
the Thoth Tarot.
Method ofDivination and the Meanings ofthe Cards                                    275


    Any adept reader of tarot cards will tell you that if you wish to use the tarot as
a divinatory tool, it is best to choose a spread and to develop a personal glossary of
meanings based upon your own familiarity with the qualities and characteristics of
each card and the knowledge and experience you gather in actually working with
the cards.
     To develop that experience, you need to start somewhere—and for most people
that somewhere usually entails reading the cards for yourself or others and looking
up the meaning
         of the cards in a book. If that is what you intend to do with this book,
then I am going to stay completely out of the way. The method of divination and
meanings you will find in this chapter have been culled exclusively from Crowley's
own writings and from the tarot material found in The Equinox, Volume I."
    You will see that Crowley's method of divination is extremely complex and
incorporates many of the astrological and Qabalistic principles I’ve discussed through-
out the book. If you are just beginning your tarot career, you will most likely want
to start with a simpler method, such as the three-card Past-Present-Future spread,
or others you can find in other tarot texts.


    A METHOD OF DIVINATION BY THE TAROT
    O.M. (ALEISTER CROWLEY);
    (This method is that given to students of the grade Adept Adeptus Minor in
    the R. R. et A. C. But it has been revised and improved, while certain safe-
    guards have been introduced in order to make its abuse impossible—O.M.]


    1. THE SIGNIFICATOR.
        Choose a card to represent the Querent, using your knowledge or judg-
        ment of his character rather than dwelling on his physical characteristics.
    2. Take the cards in your left hand. In the right hand hold the wand over
       them, and say: I invoke thee, J A O, that thou wilt send H R U, the great
       Angel that is set over the operations of this Secret Wisdom, to lay his
       hand invisibly upon these consecrated cards of art, that thereby we may
       obtain true knowledge of hidden things, to the glory of thine ineffable
       Name. Amen.
    3. Hand the cards to Querent, and bid him think of the question attentively,
       and cut.
    4. Take the cards as cut, and hold as for dealing.


                                     First Operation

    This shows the situation of the Querent at the time when he consults you.

    1. The pack being in front of you, cut, and place the top half to the left.
                                            Understanding Aleister Crowley’s Thoth Tarot


     . Cut each pack again to the left.
w    . These four stacks represent I H V H, from right to left.
     . Find the Significator. If it be in the Yod pack, the question refers to work,
      business, etc.; if in the Hé pack, to love, marriage, or pleasure; if in the
      Vau pack, to trouble, loss, scandal, quarrelling, etc.; if in the Hé final
      pack, to money, goods, and such purely material matters.
Wa   . Tell the Querent what he has come for: if wrong, abandon the divination.
     . If right, spread out the pack containing the Significator, face upwards.
      Count the cards from him, in the direction in which he faces.”


The counting should include the card from which you count.
For Knights, Queens and Princes, count 4.
For Princesses, count 7.
For Aces, count 11.
For small cards, count according to the number.
For trumps, count 3 for the elemental trumps; 9 for the planetary trumps; 12
for the Zodiacal trumps.
Make a “story” of these cards. This story is that of the beginning of the
affair.


7. Pair the cards on either side of the Significator, then those outside them,
      and so on. Make another “story,” which should fill in the details omitted
      in the first.
     . If this story is not quite accurate, do not be discouraged. Perhaps the
      Querent himself does not know everything. But the main lines ought
      to be laid down firmly, with correctness, or the divination should be
      abandoned.


                                   Second Operation

                      DEVELOPMENT OF THE QUESTION

     . ShufÒe, invoke suitably, and let Querent cut as before.
     . Deal cards into twelve stacks, for the twelve astrological houses of
      heaven.
     . Make up your mind in which stack you ought to find the Significator,
      “e.g.” in the seventh houseif the question concerns marriage, and so on.
     . Examine this chosen stack. If the Significator is not there, try some cog-
       nate house. On a second failure, abandon the divination.
     . Read the stack counting and pairing as before.
Method ofDivination and the Meanings ofthe Cards                                      277


                                        Third Operation

                  FURTHER DEVELOPMENT OF THE QUESTION

     =    . ShufÒe, etc., as before.
     NH   . Deal cards into twelve stacks for the twelve signs of the Zodiac.
    3. Divine the proper stack and proceed as before.


                                       Fourth Operation

                   PENULTIMATE ASPECTS OF THE QUESTIONS

    1. ShufÒe, etc., as before.
    2. Find the Significator: set him upon the table; let the thirty-six cards fol-
           lowing form a ring round him.
    3. Count and pair as before.


    {Note that the nature of each Decan is shewn by the small card attributed to
    it, and by the symbols given in Liber DCCLXXVII, cols. 149-151.]


                                        Fifth Operation

                                       FINAL RESULT

     1. ShufÒe, etc., as before.
    2. Deal into ten packs in the form of the Tree of Life.
    3. Make up your mind where the Significator should be, as before; but fail-
           ure does not here necessarily imply that the divination has gone astray.
    4. Count and pair as before.


    {Note that one cannot tell at what part of the divination the present time
    occurs. Usually Op. 1 seems to indicate the past history of the question; but
    not always so. Experience will teach. Sometimes a new current of high help
    may show the moment of consultation.


    I may add that in material matters this method is extremely valuable. I have
    been able to work out the most complex problems in minute detail. O.M.]


    It is quite impossible to obtain satisfactory results from this or any other
    system of divination unless the Art is perfectly required. It is the most sensi-
    tive, difÏcult and perilous branch of Magick. The necessary conditions, with
    a comprehensive comparative review of all important methods in use, are
    fully described and discussed in “Magick,” Chapter XVII.
278                                          Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


      The abuse of divination has been responsible, more than any other cause, for
      the discredit into which the whole subject of Magick had fallen when the
      Master Therion undertook the task of its rehabilitation. Those who neglect
      his warnings and profane the Sanctuary of Transcendental Art have no other
      than themselves to blame for the formidable and irremediable disasters
      which infallibly will destroy them. Prospero is Shakespeare's reply to Dr.
      Faustus.


DIVINATORY MEANINGS OF THE TWENTY-TWO
ATUS OF THE MAJOR ARCANA»


THE Foot
In spiritual matters, the Fool means idea, thought, spirituality, that which endeav-
ours to transcend earth. In material matters, it may, if badly dignified, mean folly,
eccentricity, or even mania. But the essential of this card is that it represents an
original, subtle, sudden impulse or impact, coming from a completely strange
quarter. All such impulses are right, if rightly received; and the good or ill inter-
pretation of the card depends entirely on the right attitude of the Querent.


THe Macus
Skill, wisdom, adroitness, elasticity, craft, cunning, deceit, theft. Sometimes occult
wisdom or power, sometimes a quick impulse, “a brain-wave.” It may imply mes-
sages, business transactions, the interference of learning or intelligence with the
matter in hand.


Tue Hicu Priestess
Pure, exalted and gracious influence enters the matter. Hence, change, alternation,
increase and decrease, fluctuation. There is, however, a liability to be led away by
enthusiasm; one may become “moon-struck” unless careful balance is maintained.


Tue Empress
Love, beauty, happiness, pleasure, success, completion, good fortune, gracious-
ness, elegance, luxury, idleness, dissipation, debauchery, friendship, gentleness,
delight.


THE EMPEROR
War, conquest, victory, strife, ambition, originality, over-weening confidence and
megalomania, quarrelsomeness, energy, vigour, stubbornness, impracticability,
rashness, ill-temper.
Method ofDivination and the Meanings ofthe Cards                                    279


THe HiEROPHANT
Stubborn strength, toil, endurance, placidity, manifestation, explanation, teach-
ing, goodness of heart, help from superiors, patience, organization, peace.


Tue Lovers
Openness to inspiration, intuition, intelligence, second sight, childishness, frivolity,
thoughtfulness divorced from practical consideration, indecision, self-contradiction,
triviality, the “high-brow.”


THE CHARIOT
Triumph, victory, hope, memory, digestion, violence in maintaining traditional
ideas, the “die-hard,” ruthlessness, lust of destruction, obedience, faithfulness,
authority under authority.


ADJUSTMENT
Justice, or rather justesse, the act of adjustment, suspension of all action pending
decision; in material matters, may refer to law suits or prosecutions. Socially, mar-
riage or marriage agreements; politically, treaties.


Tue Hermit
Illumination from within, secret impulse from within; practical plans derived
accordingly. Retirement from participation in current events.


ForTUNE
Change of fortune. (This generally means good fortune because of the fact of
consultation implies anxiety or discontent.)


Lust
Courage, strength, energy and action, une grandpassion, resort to magick, the use
of magical power.


THe Hancep Man
Enforced sacrifice, punishment, loss, fatal or voluntary, suffering, defeat, failure,
death.


DEATH
Transformation, change, voluntary or involuntary, in either case logical develop-
ment of existing conditions, yet perhaps sudden and unexpected. Apparent death
or destruction, but such interpretation is illusion.
280                                         Understanding Aleister Crowley’s Thoth Tarot


ART
Combination of forces, realization, action based on accurate calculation; the way
of escape, success after elaborate maneuvers.


Tue Devit
Blind impulse, irresistibly strong and unscrupulous, ambition, temptation, obses-
sion, secret plan about to be executed; hard work, obstinacy, rigidity, aching dis-
content, endurance.


THe Tower
Quarrel, combat, danger, ruin, destruction of plans, sudden death, escape from
prison.


Tue Star
Hope, unexpected help, clearness of vision, realization of possibilities, spiritual
insight, with bad aspects, error of judgement, dreaminess, disappointment.


THe Moon
Illusion deception, bewilderment, hysteria, even madness, dreaminess, falsehood,
error, crisis, “the darkest hour before the dawn,” the brink of important change.


THE Sun
Glory, gain riches, triumph, pleasure, frankness, truth, shamelessness, arrogance,
vanity, manifestation, recovery from sickness, but sometimes sudden death.


THE AEON
Final decision in respect of the past, new current in respect of the future; always
represents the taking of a definite step.


THE UNIVERSE
The matter of the question itself, synthesis, the end of the matter, may mean
delay, opposition, obstinacy, inertia, patience, perseverance, persistent stubborn-
ness in difÏculty. The crystallization of the whole matter involved.


DIVINATORY MEANINGS OF THE FIFTY-SIX
CARDS OF THE MINOR ARCANA?:


Ace oF Wanps
It symbolizes Force—strength, rush, vigour, energy, and it governs, according to
its nature, various works and questions. It implies Natural, as opposed to Invoked,
Force.
Method ofDivination and the Meanings ofthe Cards                                    281


Knicut ofr Wanps
He is active, generous, fierce, sudden, impetuous. If ill dignified, he is evil-
minded, cruel, bigoted, brutal.


QueeEN or WANDS
Adaptability, steady force applied to an object, steady rule, great attractive power,
power of command, yet liked notwithstanding. Kind and generous when not
opposed. If ill dignified, obstinate, revengeful, domineering, tyrannical, and apt to
turn against another without a cause.


Prince or WANDS
Swift, strong, hasty; rather violent, yet just and generous; noble and scorning
meanness. If ill dignified—cruel, intolerant, prejudiced and ill natured.


Princess OF WANDS
Brilliance, courage, beauty, force, sudden in anger or love, desire of power,
enthusiasm, revenge. If ill dignified, she is superficial, theatrical, cruel, unstable,
domineering.


Two or Wanps
Influence over others, authority, power, dominion.
Strength, domination, harmony of rule and of justice. Boldness, courage, fierce-
ness, shamelessness, revenge, resolution, generous, proud, sensitive, ambitious,
refined, restless, turbulent, sagacious withal, yet unforgiving and obstinate.


THREE OF WANDS
Pride, arrogance, self-assertion.
Established force, strength, realization of hope. Completion of labour. Success
after struggle. Pride, nobility, wealth, power, conceit. Rude self-assumption and
insolence. Generosity, obstinacy, etc.

Four or WANDs
Settlement, arrangement, completion.
Perfection or completion of a thing built up with trouble and labour. Rest after
labour, subtlety, cleverness, beauty, mirth, success in completion. Reasoning fac-
ulty, conclusions drawn from previous knowledge. Unreadiness, unreliable and
unsteady through over-anxiety and hurriedness of action. Graceful in manner, at
times insincere, etc.
282                                            Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


Five or WanpDs
Quarrelling andfighting.
Violent strife and boldness, rashness, cruelty, violence, lust, desire, prodigality and
generosity; depending on whether the card is well or ill dignified.


Six oF Wanps
Gain.
Victory after strife: Love: pleasure gained by labour: carefulness, sociability and
avoiding of strife, yet victory therein: also insolence, and pride of riches and suc-
cess, etc. The whole dependent on the dignity.


SEVEN OF WANDS
Opposition, yet courage.
Possible victory, depending on the energy and courage exercised; valour; opposi-
tion, obstacles and difÏculties, yet courage to meet them; quarrelling, ignorance,
pretence, and wrangling, and threatening; also victory in small and unimportant
things: and influence upon subordinates.


EicutT oF WaANDs
Hasty communications and messages; swiftness.
Too much force applied too suddenly. Very rapid rush, but quickly passed and
expended. Violent, but not lasting. Swiftness, rapidity, courage, boldness, confi-
dence, freedom, warfare, violence; love of open air, field-sports, gardens and
meadows. Generous, subtle, eloquent, yet somewhat untrustworthy; rapacious,
insolent, oppressive. Theft and robbery. According to dignity.

Nine oF Wanps
Strength, power, health, recoveryfrom stchness.
Tremendous and steady force that cannot be shaken. Herculean strength, yet
sometimes scientifically applied. Great success, but with strife and energy.
Victory, preceded by apprehension and fear. Health good, and recovery not in
doubt. Generous, questioning and curious; fond of external appearances:
intractable, obstinate.


Ten or WANDS
Cruelty, malice, revenge, injustice.
Cruel and overbearing force and energy, but applied only to material and selfish
ends. Sometimes shows failure in a matter, and the opposition too strong to be
controlled; arising from the person's too great selfishness at the beginning. Il!-will,
levity, lying, malice, slander, envy, obstinacy; swiftness in evil and deceit, if ill dig-
nified. Also generosity, disinterestedness and self-sacrifice, when well dignified.
Method ofDivination and the Meanings ofthe Cards                                       283


ACE or Cups

It symbolizes Fertility—productiveness, beauty, pleasure, happiness, etc.


KNIGHT oF Cups
Graceful, poetic, Venusian, indolent, but enthusiastic if roused. Ill dignified, he is
sensual, idle and untruthful.


QUEEN oF Cups
She is imaginative, poetic, kind, yet not willing to take much trouble for another.
Coquettish, good-natured and underneath a dreamy appearance. Imagination
stronger than feeling. Very much affected by other influences, and therefore more
dependent upon dignity than most symbols.


PRINCE OF Cups
He is subtle, violent, crafty and artistic; a fierce nature with calm exterior.
Powerful for good or evil but more attracted by the evil if allied with apparent
Power or Wisdom. If ill dignified, he is intensely evil and merciless.


PRINCESS OF Cups
Sweetness, poetry, gentleness and kindness. Imaginative, dreamy, at times indo-
lent, yet courageous if roused. When ill dignified she is selfish and luxurious.


Two or Cups
Marriage, love, pleasure.
Harmony of masculine and feminine united. Harmony, pleasure, mirth, subtlety:
but if ill dignified—folly, dissipation, waste, silly actions.


THREE OF Cups
Plenty, hospitality, eating and drinking, pleasure, dancing, new clothes, merriment.
Abundance, plenty, success, pleasure, sensuality, passive success, good luck and
fortune; love, gladness, kindness, liberality.

Four oF Cups
Receiving pleasure or kindnessfrom others, but some discomfort therewith.
Success or pleasure approaching their end. A stationary period in happiness,
which may, or may not, continue. It does not mean love and marriage so much as
the previous symbol. It is too passive a symbol to represent perfectly complete
happiness. Swiftness, hunting and pursuing. Acquisition by contention: injustice
sometimes; some drawbacks to pleasure implied.
284                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


Five or Cups
Disappointment in love, marriage broken off, unkindness ofafriend; loss offriendship.
Death, or end of pleasure: disappointment, sorrow and loss in those things from
which pleasure is expected. Sadness, treachery, deceit; ill-will, detraction; charity
and kindness ill requited; all kinds of anxieties and troubles from unsuspected and
unexpected sources.


Six oF Cups
Beginning of wish, happiness, success, or enjoyment.
Commencement of steady increase, gain and pleasure; but commencement only.
Also affront, detection, knowledge, and in some instances contention and strife
arising from unwarranted self-assertion and vanity. Sometimes thankless and pre-
sumptuous; sometimes amiable and patient. According to dignity as usual.


SEVEN OF Cups
Lying, promises unfulfilled; illuston, deception, error; slight success at outset, not
retained.
Possible victory, but neutralized by the supineness of the person: illusionary suc-
cess, deception in the moment of apparent victory. Lying, error, promises unful-
filled. Drunkenness, wrath, vanity. Lust, fornication, violence against women,
selfish dissipation, deception in love and friendship. Often success gained, but not
followed up. Modified as usual by dignity.

Eicut or Cups
Success abandoned; decline of interest.
Temporary success, but without further results. Thing thrown aside as soon as
gained. Not lasting, even in the matter in hand. Indolence in success. Journeying
from place to place. Misery and repining without cause. Seeking after riches.
Instability.


Nine oF Cups
Complete success, pleasure and happiness, wishesfulfilled.
Complete and perfect realization of pleasure and happiness, almost perfect; self-
praise, vanity, conceit, much talking of self, yet kind and lovable, and may be self-
denying therewith. High-minded, not easily satisfied with small and limited
ideas. Apt to be maligned through too much self-assumption. A good and gener-
ous, but sometimes foolish nature.
Method ofDivination and the Meanings ofthe Cards                                   285


TEN OF Cups
Matter settled: complete goodfortune.
Permanent and lasting success and happiness, because inspired from above. Not
so sensual as “Lord of Material Happiness,” yet almost more truly happy.
Pleasure, dissipation, debauchery, quietness, peacemaking. Kindness, pity, gen-
erosity, wantonness, waste, etc., according to dignity.


AcE oF SworDs
It symbolizes “Invoked,” as contrasted with Natural Force: for it is the Invocation
of the Sword. Raised upward, it invokes the Divine crown of Spiritual Brightness,
but reversed it is the Invocation of Demonic Force; and becomes a fearfully evil
symbol. It represents, therefore, very great power for good or evil, but invoked;
and it also represents whirling Force, and strength through trouble. It is the afÏr-
mation of Justice upholding Divine Authority; and it may become the Sword of
Wrath, Punishment, and AfÒiction.


KNIGHT OF SwoRDS
He is active, clever, subtle, fierce, delicate, courageous, skilful, but inclined to
domineer. Also to overvalue small things, unless well dignified. If ill dignified,
deceitful, tyrannical and crafty.


QUEEN OF SworDs
Intensely perceptive, keen observation, subtle, quick and confident: often perse-
vering, accurate in superficial things, graceful, fond of dancing and balancing. If
ill dignified, cruel, sly, deceitful, unreliable, though with a good exterior.


PRINCE OF SworDs
Full of ideas and thoughts and designs, distrustful, suspicious, firm in friendship
and enmity; careful, observant, slow, over-cautious, symbolizes Alpha and
Omega; he slays as fast as he creates. If ill dignified: harsh, malicious, plotting;
obstinate, yet hesitating; unreliable.


PRINCESS OF SWORDS
Wisdom, strength, acuteness; subtlety 1in material things: grace and dexterity. If ill
dignified, sheis frivolous and cunning.
286                                              Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


Two oF Sworps
Quarrel made up, yet still some tension n relations: actions sometimes selfish, sometimes
unselfish.
Contradictory characters in the same nature, strength through suffering; pleasure
after pain. Sacrifice and trouble, yet strength arising therefrom, symbolized by the
position of the rose, as though the pain itself had brought forth beauty.
Arrangement, peace restored; truce; truth and untruth; sorrow and sympathy. Aid
to the weak; arrangement; justice, unselfishness; also a tendency to repetition of
affronts on being pardoned; injury when meaning well; given to petitions; also a
want of tact, and asking question of little moment; talkative.


THREE OF SwoRDS
Unhappiness, sorrow, and tears.
Disruption, interruption, separation, quarrelling, sowing of discord and strife,
mischief-making, sorrow and tears; yet mirth in Platonic pleasures; singing, faith-
fulness in promises, honesty in money transactions, selfish and dissipated, yet
sometimes generous: deceitful in words and repetitions; the whole according to
dignity.
Four oF Sworps
Convalescence, recoveryfrom sickness; changefor the better.
Rest from sorrow; yet after and through it. Peace from and after war. Relaxation
of anxiety. Quietness, rest, ease and plenty, yet after struggle. Goods of this life;
abundance; modified by dignity as is usual.


Five oF Sworps
Defeat, loss, malice, spite, slander, evil-speaking.
Contest finished and decided against the person; failure, defeat, anxiety, trouble,
poverty, avarice, grieving after gain, laborious, unresting; loss and vileness of
nature; malicious, slanderous, lying, spiteful and tale-bearing. A busybody and
separator of friends, hating to see peace and love between others. Cruel, yet cow-
ardly, thankless and unreliable. Clever and quick in thought and speech. Feelings
of pity easily roused, but unenduring.


S1x oF Sworps
Labour, work, journey by water.
Success after anxiety and trouble; self-esteem, beauty, conceit, but sometimes
modesty therewith; dominance, patience, labour, etc.
Method ofDivination and the Meanings ofthe Cards                                      287


SEVEN OF SworDs
Journey by land: in character untrustworthy.
Partial success. Yielding when victory is within grasp, as if the last reserves of
strength were used up. Inclination to lose when on the point of gaining, through
not continuing the effort. Love of abundance, fascinated by display, given to com-
pliments, affronts and insolences, and to spy upon others. Inclined to betray con-
fidences, not always intentionally. Rather vacillatory and unreliable.


E1GHT oF SworpDs
Narrow, restricted, petty, a prison.
Too much force applied to small things: too much attention to detail at the
expense of the principal and more important points. When ill dignified, these
qualities produce malice, pettiness, and domineering characteristics. Patience in
detail of study; great care in some things, counterbalanced by equal disorder in
others. Impulsive; equally fond of giving or receiving money or presents; gener-
ous, clever, acute, selfish and without strong feeling of affection. Admires wis-
dom, yet applies it to small and unworthy objects.


Nine OF Sworps
Illness, suffering, malice, cruelty, patn.
Despair, cruelty, pitilessness, malice, suffering, want, loss, misery. Burden, oppres-
sion, labour, subtlety and craft, dishonesty, lying and slander. Yet also obedience,
faithfulness, patience, unselfishness, etc. According to dignity.


TEN OF SworRDS
Ruin, death, defeat, disruption.
Almost a worse symbol than the Nine of Swords. Undisciplined, warring force,
complete disruption and failure. Ruin of all plans and projects. Disdain, insolence
and impertinence, yet mirth and jollity therewith. A marplot, loving to overthrow
the happiness of others; a repeater of things; given to much unprofitable speech,
and of many words. Yet clever, eloquent, etc., according to dignity.


Ace oF Disks
It represents materiality in all senses, good and evil: and is, therefore, in a sense,
illusionary: it shows material gain, labour, power, wealth, etc.


KnicuT oF Disks
Unless very well dignified he is heavy, dull, and material. Laborious, clever, and
patient in material matters. If ill dignified, he is avaricious, grasping, dull, jealous;
not very courageous, unless assisted by other symbols.
288                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


QUEEN OF Disks
She is impetuous, kind; timid, rather charming; great-hearted; intelligent, melan-
choly; truthful, yet of many moods. If ill dignified she is undecided, capricious,
changeable, foolish.


Prince oF Disks
Increase of matter. Increases good or evil, solidifies; practically applies things.
Steady; reliable. If ill dignified he is selfish, animal and material: stupid. In either
case slow to anger, but furious if roused.


Princess oF Disks
She is generous, kind, diligent, benevolent, careful, courageous, persevering, piti-
ful. If ill dignified she is wasteful and prodigal.


Two oF Disks
Pleasant change, visit tofriends.
The harmony of change, alternation of gain and loss; weakness and strength;
everchanging occupation; wandering, discontented with any fixed condition of
things; now elated, then melancholy; industrious, yet unreliable; fortunate
through prudence of management, yet sometimes unaccountably foolish; alterna-
tively talkative and suspicious. Kind, yet wavering and inconsistent. Fortunate in
journeying. Argumentative.


THREE OF Disks
Business, paid employment, commercial transaction.
Working and constructive force, building up, creation, erection; realization and
increase of material things; gain in commercial transactions, rank; increase of sub-
stance, influence, cleverness in business, selfishness. Commencement of matters
to be established later. Narrow and prejudiced. Keen in matters of gain; some-
times given to seeking after impossibilities.

Four oF Disks
Gain of money or influence: a present.
Assured material gain: success, rank, dominion, earthy power, completed but
leading to nothing beyond. Prejudicial, covetous, suspicious, careful and orderly,
but discontented. Little enterprise or originality. According to dignity as usual.
Method ofDivination and the Meanings ofthe Cards                                 289


Five or Disks
Loss ofprofession, loss of money, monetary anxtety.
Loss of money or position. Trouble about material things. Labour, toil, land cul-
tivation; building, knowledge and acuteness of earthly things, poverty, carefulness,
kindness; sometimes money regained after severe toil and labour. Unimaginative,
harsh, stern, determined, obstinate.


Six oF Disks
Success in material things, prosperity in business.
Success and gain in material undertakings. Power, influence, rank, nobility, rule
over the people. Fortunate, successful, liberal and just. If ill dignified, may be
purse-proud, insolent from excess, or prodigal.


SEVEN OF Disks
Unprofttable speculations and employments; little gain for much labour.
Promises of success unfulfilled. (Shewn, as it were, by the fact that the rosebuds
do not come to anything.) Loss of apparently promising fortune. Hopes
deceived and crushed. Disappointment, misery, slavery, necessity and baseness. A
cultivator of land, and yet a loser thereby. Sometimes it denotes slight and isolated
gains with no fruits resulting therefrom, and of no further account, though seem-
ing to promise well.


E1GuT oF Disks
Skill: prudence: cunning.
Over-careful in small things at the expense of great: “Penny wise and pound fool-
ish”: gain of ready money in small sums; mean; avaricious; industrious; cultivation
of land; hoarding, lacking in enterprise.


Nine oF Disks
Inheritance, much increase ofgoods.
Complete realization of material gain, goods, riches; inheritance; covetous; treas-
uring of goods; and sometimes theft and knavery. The whole according to dignity.


TEN oF Disks
Riches and wealth.
Completion of material gain and fortune; but nothing beyond: as it were, at the
very pinnacle of success. Old age, slothfulness; great wealth, yet sometimes loss in
part; heaviness; dullness of mind, yet clever and prosperous in money transactions.
              CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

                                      7
               GLOSSARY OF THELEMIC
                 AND TAROT TERMS


A..A.. “It is commonly believed that A..A.-. stands for Argenteum Astrum
(Silver Star). I have been informed in no uncertain terms that this is not the case.
The A..A.°. was founded in 1907 by Crowley and George Cecil Jones. Based
upon the classic Rosicrucian grade system of the Golden Dawn, the A..A...
requires the Magician to actually achieve the states of consciousness and magical
powers embodied in each of the ten sephiroth (i.e., the Magician is only an
Adeptus Minor when he or she has actually achieved the Knowledge and
Conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel). The A.A... is not a lodge system,
and is entirely secret.””

Abrahadabra: “The word of the Aeon. . . the cypher of the Great Work.”TM


Abyss: On the diagram of the Tree of Life the Abyss is the area (or rather, non-
area) that separates the first three sephiroth (the supernal triad—the Ideal) from
the seven remaining sephiroth (the Actual).

Adeptus Exemptus: A.:.A.°.Grade of an initiate who has achieved the level of
consciousness represented by Chesed, the fourth sephira of the Tree of Life.
Attainment of the next grade, that of Master of the Temple, entails crossing the
Abyss.


Adeptus Minor: A... A.°. Grade of an initiate who has achieved the level of con-
sciousness represented by Tiphareth the sixth sephira of the Tree of Life. In this
grade, one attains the knowledge and conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel.
Glossary of Thelemic and Tarot Terms                                                291


Adjustment: Atu VIII of the Thoth Tarot. The traditional name of this card is
Justice. See Lamed.


Aeon: Atu XX of the Thoth Tarot. The traditional name of this card is Judgment
or The Last Judgment. The Aeon represents the birth of the Aeon of Horus,
which signaled the last judgment (end of the world) of the previous Age, the
Aeon of Osiris. See Aeon of Horus; Aeon of Isis; Aeon of Osiris; Shin; Fire;
Spirit.


Aeon of Horus: The present magical age of human development. According to
Crowley, it began at the Equinox of the Gods, March 20, 1904. Inspired by the
knowledge that the Sun is perpetually shining (and not killed and reborn with
each daily and yearly cycle), enlightened worshipers of the Aeon of Horus view
life as a process of continual growth and strife by which one eventually develops
the death-conquering consciousness of the continuity of existence. In the Aeon
of Horus, it is the individual, not the tribe, family or nation, that is the basic unit
of society.


Aeon of Isis: Magical age of human development at which time the pursuit of
basic nourishment was the dominant theme in human consciousness and
endeavor. The Earth and the powers of woman were deified as the source of all
life and nourishment. This matriarchal age was characterized by the mysteries of
the hunt, goddess worship, and cannibalism.


Aeon of Osiris: Magical age of human development at which time the mysteries
of life and death were the dominant theme in human consciousness and
endeavor. The Sun and powers of man were deified as the supreme source of all
life. This patriarchal age was obsessed with overcoming death and was character-
ized by the mysteries of agriculture, human sacrifice, and the worship of male
gods who are murdered and resurrected.


Ain—Nothing: Profound negativity, precluding even the concept of negative
existence. First of the three negative veils from which Kether (One) emerges.
See Fool.


Ain-Soph—Nothing without Limit: Second of the three negative veils from
which Kether (One) emerges. See Fool.


Ain-Soph-Aur—Limitless Light: Third and last of the three negative veils from
which Kether (One) emerges. See Fool.
292                                          Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


Aleph—#: Ox. Hebrew equivalent to English letter A and the number 1. On the
Tree of Life, it is path 11, joining the first sephira, Kether, with the second
sephira,   Chokmah. Represents the element air. Tarot trump—the Fool.

Angel: Traditionally, the man or angel is the Kerubic emblem of Aquarius.
However, in the New Aeon (and as represented in the Thoth Tarot), the angel is
the Kerubic emblem of Scorpio. See Kerubic Emblems.


Ankh-af-na Khonsu: Twenty-fifth dynasty Egyptian priest of Mentu and politi-
cal figure. His self-painted funeral stéle was on display at Cairo’s Boulak museum
in the spring of 1904 and served as the magical talisman that triggered the psy-
chic events leading up to the Equinox of the Gods and Crowley's reception of
The Book ofthe Law.


Art: Atu XIV of the Thoth Tarot. The traditional name of this card is
Temperance. See Samekh, Sagittarius.


Assiah: See Qabalistic Worlds.


Astrological Age: By observing the relative position of the Sun against the back-
drop of the zodiacal band at the vernal equinox, ancient observers discovered that
the Sun seemed to fall a bit short of its starting position of the previous year,
resulting in the loss of approximately one full degree every seventy-two years.
This makes the Sun appear to move backward across the belt of the zodiac at the
approximate rate of one zodiac sign every two thousand one hundred sixty years.
The ancients called this process the precession of the equinoxes. The time it
takes to move from one sign to another is known as an astrological age. This
phenomenon is actually caused by an extremely slow wobble of Earth's axis,
which, like a spinning top, traces circles in space with its north and south poles.
Astrologers generally agree we have recently entered or are about to enter the
astrological Age of Aquarius.


Atu: The trumps of the Thoth Tarot are numbered by roman numerals and des-
ignated Atus. “Some Etymologists of a singularly idle disposition have tried to
derive the French word “atout” from the ATU meaning House. It may seem sim-
pler to suggest that ‘atout’ is short for ‘bon a tout’, meaning ‘good for anything’,
because a trump will take any card of any suit.”*”


Arziluth: See Qabalistic Worlds
Glossary of Thelemic and Tarot Terms                                                293


Ayin—y: Eye. Hebrew equivalent to English letters A, Au, or O, and the
number seventy. On the Tree of Life, it is path 26, joining the sixth sephira,
Tiphareth, with the eighth sephira, Hod. Represents the zodiac sign Capricorn.
tarot trump—the Devil.


Babalon: In the Thelemic pantheon, Babalon is one of two major aspects of
female deity, Nuit being the other. Just as Nuit is paired with Hadit, her male
counterpart, Babalon, joins with the Therion, the Beast. The following is
excerpted from The Magick ofThelema.


    Therion/Babalon as Chokmah/Binah—To the student of the Qabalah the
    easiest way to begin to understand Therion and Babalon is to conceptualize
     them as personifications of the second and third Sephiroth of the Tree of
     Life, Chokmah and Binah, respectively.
         The second Sephira, Chokmah represents the original concept of dual-
    ity, and as such is the chaotic despoiler of the perfect unity of the first
     Sephira, Kether. Chaos is another title of Chokmah and in certain Thelemic
    rituals is identified with Therion. Chokmah is also the Divine Will, the
    Logos, the Word whose vibration is the creative essence of the universe. As
    the supernal Father, Chokmah/Therion is the archetype of the lingam, the
    universal Male.
         The third Sephira, Binah represents the original reconciliation and
    balance of the Divine Self (Kether) and the reflected Not Self (Chokmah).
     She is viewed as the all-receptive mate of Chokinah and when they are
    united the primal unity of Kether is realized. As Binah/Babalon resides just
    above the Abyss, She eventually receives unto Herself the totality of the life
    of the evolving universe. This universal life is symbolized as the “blood of the
    Saints” which She gathers up into her great cup (the Holy Grail). This she
    shares with the Beast, and they unite in drunken ecstasy. Thus she is called
    the Great Whore for in her “shamelessness” she receives all and refuses
    none.”


Beast: In the Thelemic pantheon, the Beast is one of two major aspects of male
deity, Hadit being the other. On the Tree of Life, the Beast is associated with the
second sephira, Chokmah. See Babalon.


Beth—s: House. Hebrew equivalent to English letter B and the number two. On
the Tree of Life, it is path 12,joining the first sephira, Kether, with the third
sephira, Binah. Represents the planet Mercury; Tarot trump—the Magus.
294                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


Binah—Understanding: The third sephira of the Tree of Life; the sphere of
Saturn. Binah is also sephirotic home to the great mother, Babalon, and Nuit. In
tarot, it is the home of the four court-card Queens, and the small-card threes.


Blood of the Martyrs (Saints): The consciousness and the essence of all evolving
life. See the Chariot, Holy Grail, Babalon.


The Book ofthe Law: Liber
                        AL vel Legis, The Book ofthe Law, was dictated to
Crowley on April 8, 9, and 10, 1904, in Cairo by a preter human intelligence
calling itself Aiwass. It is the primary holy book of Thelema and the source of
doctrines relating to the Thoth Tarot, especially the concept of the Hebrew letter
Tzaddi not being attributed to the Star trump.


Briah: See Qabalistic Worlds.


Bull—Taurus: See Kerubic Emblems.


Chariot: Atu VII of the Thoth Tarot. See Cheth.

Charioteer: Conveyor of the Holy Grail. Alternate title for Atu VII, the Chariot.


Chesed—Mercy: The fourth sephira on the Tree of Life; the sphere ofJupiter.
As the first sephira below the Abyss, Chesed is the highest manifestation of the
universe in actuality (the supernal triad above it being the inscrutable and
unmanifest ideal). Consequently, Chesed is the perfect environment for the
Demiurge (Demiourgos), the creator god who, because it seemingly created the
universe, mistakenly thinks and acts as if it were the supreme being. Because it is
not really the supreme being, the Demiurge has a real blind spot concerning its
omnipotence, and, like a spoiled child, is constantly trying to prove its divinity.
This leaves us with a creator who is violently insecure and paranoid. The jealous
and psychotic behavior of the mythological composite gods associated with
Chesed—Zeus/Jupiter/Jove/Jehovah—are frightfully consistent with this syn-
drome. In tarot, Chesed is the home of the small-card fours.

Cheth—": Fence. Hebrew equivalent to English letters Ch and the number
eight. On the Tree of Life, it is path 18, joining the third sephira, Binah, with the
fifth sephira, Geburah. Represents the zodiac sign Cancer. Tarot trump—the
Chariot.


Chiah: See Parts of the Soul.
Glossary of
         Thelemic and Tarot Terms                                                   295


Chokmah—Wisdom: The second sephira of the Tree of Life; the sphere of the
zodiac. Chokmah is also sephirotic home to the All-Father, the Beast, and
Hadit. In tarot, Chokmah is the home of the four court-card Knights and the
small-card twos.


Choronzon: See Daath.


Color Scales: The pure divine consciousness becomes obscured as it descends the
ten sephiroth of each of the four Qabalistic worlds. The Qabalists imagine this
descent of spirit into matter as a pure light broken into progressively lower vibra-
tions. The four scales of color are, in descending order: The King, Queen, Prince,
and Princess scales. See chapter 10.


Crowley, Edward Alexander (Aleister): 1875-1947. A very interesting and con
troversial person.


Crowley, Rose Edith: 1874-1932. Aleister Crowley's first wife. Older sister of Sir
Gerald Festus Kelly (1879-1972), later president of the Royal Art Academy in
England. Rose was very instrumental in the psychic events leading up to and
including the reception of The Book ofthe Law. Crowley considered her his first
Scarlet Woman (Shakti).


Cup: Magical weapon representing the magician’s understanding. The cup repre-
sents the Neshamah (soul intuition) part of the soul, and the Qabalistic world of
Briah (creative world).


Cup of Babalon: Binah personified as the vessel that receives the totality of the
essence of all evolving life (blood of the Saints) and receives the Master of the
Temple (8° = 3°) after he or she has crossed the Abyss (the pathless area on the
Tree of Life between the fourth sephira, Chesed, and the third sephira, Binah).
See Atu XJ, Lust; Atu VII, the Chariot; Atu XII, the Universe; Babalon; Binah;
Master of the Temple; Nuit; and Holy Grail.


Cup of Fornication: See Holy Grail.


Cups: See Suits. In tarot readings, Cups often indicate matters of the heart,
romance, love, creativity, art, and emotions.
296                                          Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


Daath—Knowledge: A phantom or false sephira of the Tree of Life positioned in
the Abyss separating the supernal triad from the rest of the Tree. While knowl-
edge is a vital and necessary tool in one’s initiatory journey, the reasoning facul-
ties have their limits and must eventually be overcome before the highest levels
of consciousness can be achieved. Daath is the false crown of reason, and the
Abyss is the abode of Choronzon, archdemon of dispersion. It is this great devil’s
duty to engage the initiate in conversation—endless loops of rationalizations that
prevent him or her from finally surrendering to transcendent consciousness.


Daleth—": Door. Hebrew equivalent to English letter D and the number four.
On the Tree of Life, it is path 14, joining the second sephira, Chokmah, with the
third sephira, Binah. Represents the planet Venus; Tarot trump I]—the
Empress.


Death: Atu XIII of the Thoth Tarot. See Nun.


Decan: Period of ten degrees in the zodiacal year. Each of the thirty-six small
cards of the Thoth Tarot represents one of the thirty-six decans of the year. See
Planets.


Demiurge (Demiourgos): See Chesed. In the Thoth Tarot, the behavior of the
Demiurge is expressed in Atu X, Fortune, and the small-card fours.

Devil: Atu XV of the Thoth Tarot. See Ayin.


Disk: Magical weapon representing the magician’s body and material environ-
ment. The disk represents the Nephesh (animal soul) part of the soul and the
Qabalistic world of Assiah (material world).


Disks: See Suits. In tarot readings, disks often indicate practical and material
matters, money, labor, home, investment, and the physical body.


Double Letters (Hebrew): The seven double letters of the Hebrew alphabet orig-
inally could be pronounced in two distinct ways. The Sephir Yetzirah attributes
them to the seven planets of the ancients. Translations vary as to the planetary
assignments. The Adepts of the Golden Dawn chose the following, as did
Crowley for the Thoth Tarot:


      > Beth: Mercury (The Magus)
      3 Gimel: Moon (The Priestess)
      | Daleth: Venus (The Empress)
Glossary ofThelemic and Tarot Terms                                               297


    = Kaph: Jupiter (Fortune)
    B Pé: Mars (The Tower)
    | Resh: Sun (The Sun)
    \Tau: Saturn (The Universe)


Eagle: Traditionally, the eagle is the Kerubic emblem of Scorpio. However, in the
New Aeon (and as represented in the Thoth Tarot), the eagle is the Kerubic
emblem of Aquarius. See Kerubic Emblems. In alchemy, the eagle can relate to
the Moon and to fundamental forces and organic substances of female sexuality.


Emperor: Atu IV of the Thoth Tarot. See Tzaddi.


Empress: Atu III of the Thoth Tarot. See Daleth.


Enochian Aethyrs: Just as the Tree of Life classifies the heavens of human con-
sciousness into ten major divisions (sephiroth), the Enochian magick of Dr.John
Dee divides the heavens into thirty Aires, or Aethyrs. By ceremonially intoning
various “calls” in the angelic language, one can systematically penetrate these
Aethyrs and experience a vision unique to that level of consciousness. Crowley's
visions of the thrity Aethyrs are chronicled in The Vision and The Voice," and
directly influence the imagery found on several trumps, especially the Magus, the
Lovers, the Chariot, Lust, Art, and the Universe.

Equinox of the Gods: See Aeon of Horus.


Etz Ha-Chayim: See Tree of Life.


Fool: Atu 0 of the Thoth Tarot. See Aleph.


Fortune: Atu X of the Thoth Tarot. Traditional name of this card is the Wheel of
Fortune. See Kaph.


Geburah—Severity: The fifth sephira of the Tree Life; the sphere of Mars. In
tarot, Geburah is home to the small-card fives.


Geomancy: The Earth Oracle—a technique of divination traditionally associated
with the Earth and the elemental spirits of the Earth (gnomes). See Geomantic
Figures.


Geomantic Figures: There are sixteen geomantic figures which, in a divinatory
operation, are randomly generated. Each figure is a column of four levels. Each
298                                            Understanding Aleister Crowleys Thoth Tarot


level either contains a single dot or two dots. The sixteen figures represent the
twelve signs of the zodiac and the Moon's north and south nodes. There are two
cards in the Thoth Tarot, the Seven and Eight of Disks, that use geomantic fig-
ures in their imagery.


Gimel—3: Camel. Hebrew equivalent to English letter G and the number three.
On the Tree of Life, it is path 13, joining the first sephira, Kether, with the sixth
sephira, Tiphareth. Represents the planet Luna; Tarot trump I]—the High
Priestess.


Golden Dawn: Founded in 1888, the Order of the Golden Dawn was arguably
the most influential magical society of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
Members of the Grade of Adeptus Minor were encouraged to paint their own
deck of tarot cards based upon esoteric designs and principles. Many of the cards
of the Thoth Tarot are based on the Golden Dawn model. Aleister Crowley
joined in 1898 and would later become the catalyst in the events that would
bring about the Order's destruction. Nevertheless, the basic degree structure of
the Golden Dawn would serve as the model for Crowley’s Order of A..A...


Gunas: “All the qualities that can be predicated of anything may be ascribed to
one or more of these Gunas: Tamas is darkness, inertia, sloth, ignorance, death
and the like; Rajas is energy, excitement, fire, brilliance, restlessness; Sattvas is
calm, intelligence, lucidity and balance.”**


Hadit (alternate spelling “Hadith”): “The Second Deity of the Thelemic Trinity.
Lover of Nuit. He is depicted on the Stéle of Revealing as a winged globe at the
heart of Nuit. He is conceptualized as the infinity of an ultimately contracted
universe; the point in the center of the circle. He is ‘the ubiquitous point of view,
the only philosophically tenable conception of Reality.” [Perhaps the concept of
the pre-‘Big-Bang’ negative singularity postulated by modern physics.] Qabalists
may wish to consider the similarities to the First Veil of the Negative proceeding
Kether, AIN (Nothing).”**


Hanged Man: Atu XII of the Thoth Tarot. See Mem.


Hé—*: Window. Hebrew equivalent to English letters H or E and the number
five. On the Tree of Life, it is path 15, joining the second sephira, Chokmah,
with the sixth sephira, Tiphareth. Represents the zodiac sign Aquarius. Tarot
trump—the Star.


Hermit: Atu IX of the Thoth Tarot. See Yod.
Glossary of Tibelemic and Tarot Terms                                               299


Heru-ra-ha: The single name for the twin forms of the Egyptian god Horus.
Hoor-pa-kraat is the passive form, and Ra-Hoor Khut is the active form. As far
as we know, Heru-ra-ha is a name found only in The Book ofthe Law, chapter II,
verse 35: “The half of the word of Heru-ra-ha, called Hoor-pa-kraat and Ra-
Hoor-Khut.” In the Thoth Tarot, Heru-ra-ha is found in his double form on Atu
XX, the Aeon.


Hierophant: Atu V of the Thoth Tarot. See Vau.

High Priestess: Atu II of the Thoth Tarot. See Gimel.


Hod—Splendor: The eighth sephira of the Tree of Life; the sphere of Mercury.
In tarot, Hod is home to the small-card eights.


Holy Grail (Crowley spelled it Graal): See Cup of Babalon.


Holy Guardian Angel: Angelic being, or level of human consciousness personi-
fied as an angel, representing supreme spiritual realization of one’s personal and
devotional ideal. On the Tree of Life, this experience and level of consciousness
is represented by the sixth sephira, Tiphareth. In the Thoth Tarot, the concept is
echoed in the court-card Princes and the small-card sixes. See Adeptus Minor.


Hoor-pa-kraat: The passive form of the God Horus. Together with his twin
brother, Ra-Hoor Khut, he becomes the composite deity Heru-ra-ha. In the
Thoth Tarot, Hoor-pa-kraat is found on Atu XX, the Aeon. He is the large,
transparent child-god standing in front of his brother, the enthroned Ra-Hoor
Khut.


Horus: Egyptian god, son of Isis and Osiris. In Egyptian mythology, Horus
avenges the murder of his father. See Aeon of Horus, Hoor-pa-kraat, and Ra-
Hoor-Khut.


Isis: Egyptian goddess, sister-wife of Osiris and mother of Horus. In the Thoth
Tarot, Isis is portrayed in various aspects in trumps the Priestess, the Empress,
the Lovers, Lust, and the Star. See Aeon of Isis.


Kaph—s: Palm of hand. Hebrew equivalent to English letter K and the number
twenty. On the Tree of Life, it is path 21,joining the fourth sephira, Chesed,
with the seventh sephira, Netzach. Represents the planet Jupiter. Tarot trump—
Fortune.
300                                          Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


Kerubic Emblems: In the Thoth Tarot, the Kerubs, or Angels of the Elements,
can be found in the corners of the Hierophant and the Universe trumps and rep-
resent the fixed signs of the zodiac. Because of a revelation in Crowley's vision of
the twenty-third Aethyr of The Vision and the Voice, the Kerubs of the New Aeon
(and the Thoth Tarot) are as follows: lion (Leo), eagle (Aquarius), angel
(Scorpio), and bull (Taurus).


Kether—The Crown: The first and highest sephira of the Tree of Life; the
primum mobile. {n tarot, Kether is the home of the small-card aces.


King Scale of Color: The King scale is the highest and represents the essence—
the invisible foundation—of color.


Knight: In the Thoth Tarot, the Knight is the primary male figure of the court
cards. He is the Yod of the Tetragrammaton and represents aspects of God the
Father. He is the husband of the Queen and father of the Prince and Princess.
(In most traditional decks he is called the King. He is the fiery aspect of his suit
and is shown seated on a horse. His position on the Tree of Life is in the second
sephira, Chokmah.) See Yod Hé Vau Hé.


Lamed—®: Ox goad. Hebrew equivalent to English letter L and the number
thirty. On the Tree of Life, it is path 22, joining the fifth sephira, Geburah, with
the sixth sephira, Tiphareth. Represents the zodiac sign Libra. Tarot trump—
Adjustment.


Liber
   AL vel Legis: See The Book ofthe Law.


Lion: Symbol of the zodiac sign of Leo. In alchemy, the lion can relate to the
Sun and to fundamental forces and organic substances of male sexuality. See
Kerubic Emblems.


Lovers: Atu VI of the Thoth Tarot. See Zain.


Lust: Atu XI of the Thoth Tarot. See Teth.


Magus: AtuI of the Thoth Tarot. See Beth.


Magus: A.*.A.°. Grade of an initiate who has achieved the level of consciousness
represented by Chokmah, the second sephira on the Tree of Life.
Glossary of
         Thelemic and Tarot Terms                                                     301


Malkuth—Kingdom: The tenth and lowest sephira of the Tree Life; the sphere
of the Earth and material existence. In tarot, the home of the court-card
Princesses, and the small-card tens.


Master of the Temple: A..A.°. Grade of an initiate who has crossed the Abyss
and achieved the level of consciousness represented by Binah, the third sephira
on the Tree of Life.


Mem—®: Water. Hebrew equivalent to English letter M and the number forty.
On the Tree of Life, it is path 23, joining the fifth sephira, Geburah, with the
eighth sephira, Hod. Represents the element water. Tarot trump—the Hanged
Man. See Mother Letters.


Mercury (alchemical): “Represents action all forms and phases. His is the fluidic
basis of all transmission of activity: and, on the dynamic theory of the Universe,
he is himself the substance thereof.”**


Mobius Strip (or Mobius Band): Named for the astronomer and mathematician
August Ferdinand Mébius (1790-1868), a professor at the University of Leipzig,
a Mobius strip is a nonorientable surface. One can make one by attaching the
two ends of a long strip of paper after twisting one end 180 degrees.


Modes: In astrology, the signs of the zodiac are divided into four elemental cate-
gories (fire, water, air, and earth). Each of these four elemental categories is in
turn divided into three modes (cardinal, fixed, and mutable) that represent three
fundamental ways the energy of the element develops and manifests. The three
modes are as follows:


     Cardinal represents “the first keen onrush of that element.”** Cardinal signs
    burst into their element at the equinoxes and solstices and say, “Here I am!”


    Fixed signs define and concentrate the element. The energy of the element is
    focused upon being what it is. Fixed signs don't say, “Here I am,” they say,
    “This is what I am.” The fixed signs are represented in the Thoth Tarot by
    the Kerubic emblems found on the Hierophant and the Universe.


    Mutable signs are more subtle. They do not express the energy of the cardi-
    nal or the stability of the fixed, and by comparison seem weak. But the
    mutable signs are not weak; they're just sensitive and willing to give of
    themselves. They are flexible and can adapt the element to the adventures of
    an ever-changing universe.
302                                         Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


Moon: Atu XVIII of the Thoth Tarot. See Qoph.


Mother Letters (Hebrew): There are three primary or mother letters in the
Hebrew alphabet. The sephir Yetzirah attributes them to the three primitive
elements.


% Aleph: Air (The Fool)


5 Mem: Water (The Hanged Man)


@ Shin: Fire (The Aeon)


Neophyte: A.".A.:. Grade of an initiate who has achieved the level of conscious-
ness represented by Malkuth, the tenth sephira on the Tree of Life.


Nephesh: See Parts of the Soul.


Neshamah: See Parts of the Soul.


Netzach—Victory: The seventh sephira on the Tree Life; the sphere of Venus. In
tarot, Netzach is home to the small-card sevens.


Notarigon: One of several Qabalistic techniques of manipulating letters and
words in order to discover additional esoteric meanings. There are two kinds of
Notarigon. The first condenses a word, sentence, or phrase into a simpler one by
reading only the initial letters in an attempt to retrieve a more fundamental
truth. The second expands a word into a sentence whose component words are
the initials of the original word.


Nuit (alternate spelling “Nuith,” “Nut”): “The First Deity of the Thelemic
Trinity; traditionally the Egyptian Goddess of the night sky. She is the ‘star god-
dess who is the category of unlimited possibility.”” Upon the Stélé of Revealing,
and in Egyptian art, she is depicted as an azure goddess, tall and slender, arching
of the earth (similar in appearance to the Greek letter Omega). She is conceptu-
alized as the infinity of an ultimately expanded universe (the circumference of
the circle). All things, therefore, are contained within her body. Qabalists may
wish to consider the similarities to the Second Veil of the Negative proceeding
Kether, AIN SOPH (No Limit).”*


Nun—3: Fish. Hebrew equivalent to English letter N and the number fifty. On
the Tree of Life, it is path 24, joining the sixth sephira, Tiphareth, with the sev-
enth sephira, Netzach. Represents the zodiac sign Scorpio. Tarot trump—Death.
Glossary of
         Thelemic and Tarot Terms                                                    303


Orphic Egg: Alchemical symbol showing an egg (sometimes winged) entwined
with a serpent. Fertilization and the subsequent care of the Orphic egg is the
subject of an alchemical allegory of the great work. In the Thoth Tarot, the
trumps Magus, Lovers, Hermit, Death, and Art, either display the Orphic egg or
are concerned with its care.


Osiris: Egyptian god of the dead, brother/husband of Isis, and father of Horus.
In the Thoth Tarot, Osiris is portrayed in various aspects in trumps the
Hierophant and Death. See Aeon of Osiris.


Parts of the Soul: The Hebrew Qabalah divides the human soul into various
levels that reflect, on a microcosmic level, universal levels of consciousness and
being. One very simple mode of division is by four (corresponding to the four
letters of the Tetragrammaton, 77 1/7 *, Yod Hé Vau Heé). The tarot is, in many
ways, an expression of this fourfold division. The four parts of the soul and some
of their correspondences are as follows:


    Nephesh—The Animal Soul: The first and lowest of the four parts of the soul;
    corresponds to the final Hé of the Tetragrammaton, the element of earth,
    the suit of Disks in the tarot, and to Assiah, the material world, the first and
    lowest of the four Qabalistic worlds.


    Ruach—The Intellect
    The second of the four parts of the soul; corresponds to the Vau of the
    Tetragrammaton, the element of air, the suit of Swords in the tarot, and to
    Yetzirah, the formative world.


    Neshamah—The Soul Intuttion
    The third and second highest of the four parts of the soul; corresponds to
    the first Hé of the Tetragrammaton, the element of water, the suit of Cups
    in the tarot, and to Briah, the creative world.


    Chiah—The Life Force
    The fourth and highest of the four parts of the soul; corresponds to the Yod
    of the Tetragrammaton, the element of fire, the suit of Wands in the tarot,
    and to Atziluth, the archetypal world.


Pé—B®: Mouth. Hebrew equivalent to English letter P or F and the number
eighty. On the Tree of Life, it is path 27, joining the seventh sephira, Netzach,
with the eighth sephira, Hod. Represents the planet Mars. Tarot trump—the
Tower.
304                                         Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


Pentacles: Another name for Disks. See Suits.


Planets: The Thoth Tarot deals primarily with the seven planets of the ancients:
Saturn (the Universe), Jupiter (Fortune), Mars (the Tower), Sol (the Sun), Venus
(the Empress), Mercury (the Magus), and Luna (the Priestess). This is the order
in which the planetary spheres (sephiroth 3 through 9) are arranged on the Tree
of Life. These seven planets are also allotted (in this same repeating order) to the
thirty-six small cards of the Thoth Tarot, starting with Saturn on the Five of
Wands (at 0° Leo) and changing every decan (10°), until every decan of the year
has been assigned a planet. (The last decan of Pisces and the first decan of Aries
are both assigned the planet Mars.)


Precession of the Equinox: See Astrological Age.


Prince: In the Thoth Tarot, the Prince is the secondary male figure of the court
cards. He is the Vau of the Tetragrammaton and represents aspects of God the
Son and the Holy Guardian Angel of each human being. He is the son of the
Knight and Queen and brother/lover (and in certain ways, the father) of the
Princess. In some traditional decks, he is called the Knight. He is the airy aspect
of his suit and is shown standing in a chariot. His position on the Tree of Life is
in the sixth sephira, Tiphareth. See Yod Hé Vau Heé.


Prince Scale of Color: The Prince scale combines the colors of the King and
Queen scales.


Princess: In the Thoth Tarot, the Princess is the secondary female figure of the
court cards. In some traditional decks, she is called the Page. She is the final Hé
of the Tetragrammaton and represents aspects of the unredeemed soul of each of
us. Her position on the Tree of Life is the tenth sephira, Malkuth. (See Yod Hé
Vau Hé.) She is the daughter of the Knight and Queen and sister/lover of the
Prince. (In certain ways, she is also viewed as the daughter of the Prince.) She is
the earthy aspect of her suit and is shown standing. In the Western Mysteries,
the quest for spiritual liberation is characterized in the story of a sleeping
Princess (each of us) who is awakened by a Prince (our Holy Guardian Angel),
who marries the Princess and makes her Queen (God the Mother), which at the
same time makes him the King (God the Father). Unlike the Knight, Queen,
and Prince, the Princess does not rule a 30° period of the year. Instead, she is
considered the throne of the aces and rules, with her ace, one quarter of the sur-
face of the Earth. See chapter 11.


Princess Scale of Color: The Princess scale represents the lowest, most mixed and
polluted levels of light. See chapter 10.
Glossary of
         Thelemsc and Tarot Terms                                                 305


Qabalah (alternate spellings, Cabala, Kabbalah): Known as the Holy Kabbalah in
esoteric Judaism, Cabala in mystic Christianity, and Qabalah in Western
Hermeticism, the Qabalah is the foundation of nearly all the mystical systems of
the West, including astrology, magick, and tarot.


Qabalistic Worlds: The Qabalah divides the one cosmic reality into four
descending levels of divine consciousness or worlds (corresponding to the four
letters of the Tetragrammaton, 7 171°, Yod Hé Vau Hé). These four worlds reflect
on a macrocosmic level the four microcosmic aspects of the human soul. The
tarot is, in many ways, an expression of this four-fold division. The four
Qabalistic worlds and some of their correspondences are as follows:


    Assiah—The Material World
    The lowest of the four Qabalistic worlds; corresponds to the final Hé of the
    Tetragrammaton, the element of earth, and the suit of Disks in the tarot. In
    Assiah, the impurities produced by the degeneration of the light as it passes
    through the worlds above it (Atziluth, Briah, and Yetzirah) are crystallized
    to form the material world and human existence. Assiah’s corresponding
    part in the human soul is the Nephesh—the animal soul.


    Yetzirah—The Formative World
    The second to the lowest of the four Qabalistic worlds; corresponds to the
    Vau of the Tetragrammaton, the element of air, and the suit of Swords in the
    tarot. In Yetzirah, the universal organization of Briah becomes specific, and
    a hierarchy of angels with individual duties is established. This world is the
    mind and the mind’s eye of the deity. Yetzirah’s corresponding part in the
    human soul is the Ruach—the intellect.


    Briah—The Creative World
    The third and second highest of the four Qabalistic worlds; corresponds to
    the first Hé of the Tetragrammaton, the element water; and the suit of Cups
    in the tarot. In Briah, the pure light of Atziluth begins to become organized.
    This is the throne and abode of the highest archangels and could be viewed
    as the heart of the deity. Briah’s corresponding part in the human soul is the
    Neshamah—the divine soul intuition.


    Atziluth—The Archetypal World
    The highest of the four Qabalistic worlds; corresponds to the Yod in the
    Tetragrammaton, the element fire, and the suit of Wands in the tarot. In
    Arziluth, the male and female aspects of the deity are united in bliss. The
    remaining three worlds (Briah, Yetzirah, and Assiah) are the product of this
306                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


      union, and continue to diminish in purity. Atziluth could be considered the
      will of the deity in its purest aspect. Atzuluth’s corresponding part in the
      human soul it is the Chiah—the life force.


Qoph—}: Back of Head. Hebrew equivalent to English letter Q.and the number
100. On the Tree of Life, it is path 29, joining the seventh sephira, Netzach, with
the tenth sephira, Malkuth. Represents the zodiac sign Pisces. Tarot trump—the
Moon.


Quadruplicities of the Zodiac: The twelve signs of the zodiac are categorized,
according to element, into four groups of three signs. The four Quadruplicities
are as follows:


      Fire Signs: Aries, Leo, Sagittarius
      Water Signs: Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces
      Aur Signs: Libra, Aquarius, Gemini
      Earth Signs: Capricorn, Taurus, Virgo


Queen: In the Thoth Tarot, the Queen is the primary female figure of the court
cards. She is the first Hé of the Tetragrammaton and represents aspects of God
the Mother. She is the wife of the Knight and mother of the Prince and Princess.
She is the watery aspect of her suit and is shown enthroned. Her position on the
Tree of Life is in the third sephira, Binah. See Yod Hé Vau Heé.


Queen Scale of Color: Queen scale of color actually manifests as the eye beholds
them (shades, primary and secondary colors, etc.) See chapter 10.


Ra-Hoor-Khuit (alternate spellings, Ra-Hoor Khut, Ra-Hoor-Khuit, and Ra-
Hoor-Khv-it): “The Third Deity of the Thelemic Trinity. The Crowned and
Conquering Child of the union of Nuit and Hadit. As Nuit's expansion and
Hadit’s contraction are both infinite, so too must be their points of contact.
This infinite contact creates a field of operation in which the universe can
manifest. ‘He is, however, known under his special name, Heru-ra-ha. A
double god; his extroverted form is Ra~hoor-khuit; and his passive or intro-
verted form Hoor-pa-kraat.’””*”
   “Qabalists may wish to consider the similarities to the Third Veil of the
Negative proceeding Kether, AIN SOPH AUR (Limitless Light); also Kether
itself. In one respect He is the fundamental archetype of the God-Man, and the
Holy Guardian Angel.”


Rajas: See Gunas.
Glossary of
         Thelemic and Tarot Terms                                                  307


Resh—": Head or Face. Hebrew equivalent to English letter R and the number
200. On the Tree of Life, it is path 30, joining the eighth sephira, Hod, with the
ninth sephira, Yesod. Represents the planet Sol. Tarot trump—the Sun.

Rose Cross: See chapter 8.


Ruach: See Parts of the Soul.


Salt (Alchemical): “The inactive principle of Nature; Salt is matter which must
be energized by Sulfur to maintain the whirling equilibrium of the Universe.”TM!


Samekh—®: Tent peg. Hebrew equivalent to English letter S and the number
sixty. On the Tree of Life, it is path 25, joining the sixth sephira, Tiphareth, with
the ninth sephira, Yesod. Represents the zodiac sign Sagittarius. Tarot trump—
Art.


Satvas: See Gunas.


Shemhamphorasch: The seventy-two-part Divided Name of God. Qabalistic
tradition points out that three consecutive verses from the Book of Exodus are
each composed of seventy-two Hebrew letters. These three verses, when
arranged in three rows (the top row reading from right to left, the middle row
reading from left to right, the bottom row reading from right to left), yield sev-
enty-two columns of three letters that are designated Shemhamphorasch, the
Divided Name of God. Each of these seventy-two aspects of deity is assigned an
angel who is the executor of its will. The angel names are created by adding (to
the end of each of the three letter names) the letters IH (for an angel of mercy)
or the letters AL (for an angel ofjudgment). Each of these seventy-two angels is
assigned five degrees of the zodiacal year. Because each of the thirty-six small
cards of the tarot represents one decan (period of ten degrees), two angels of the
Shemhamphorasch are resident in each small card.

Shin—: Tooth. Hebrew equivalent to English letters Sh and the number 300.
On the Tree of Life, it is path 31, joining the eighth sephira, Hod, with the tenth
sephira, Malkuth. Represents the element fire and the element spirit. Tarot
trump—the Aeon.


Significator: Prior to using tarot in divination, one card (usually a court card) is
chosen to represent the querent. This card is designated the Significator.
308                                           Understanding Aleister Crowley’s Thoth Tarot


Simple Letters (Hebrew): Together with the three mother letters and the seven
double letters of the Hebrew alphabet, there are twelve simple letters. The sephir
Yetzirah attributes them to the twelve signs of the zodiac. Translations vary as to
the zodiacal assignments. The Adepts of the Golden Dawn chose the following,
with the exceptions of Tzaddi and Hé. This is the assignment of the Thoth
Tarot.


      3 Tzaddi: Aries (The Emperor)
      3 Vau: Taurus (The Hierophant)
      % Zain: Gemini (The Lovers)
      fm Cheth: Cancer (The Chariot)
      8 Teth: Leo (Lust)
      * Yod: Virgo (The Hermit)
      S Lamed: Libra (Adjustment)
      3 Nun: Scorpio (Death)
      © Samekh: Sagittarius (Art)
      y Ayin: Capricorn (The Devil)
      mt Hé: Aquarius (The Star)
      P Qoph: Pisces (The Moon)


Star: Atu XVII of the Thoth Tarot. See Hé, Aquarius.


Stéle of Revealing: Twenty-fifth dynasty Egyptian funeral marker of Ankh-af-
na-khonsu, a notable political and religious figure of several royal administra-
tions, which triggered a series of psychic and magical events that culminated
with Crowley’s reception of The Book ofthe Law.


Suits: The fifty-six cards of the Minor Arcana of the tarot are divided into four
suits: Wands, Cups, Swords, and Disks. These suits represent, respectively, the
elements of fire, water, air, and earth; the Qabalistic worlds of Atziluth, Briah,
Yetzirah, and Assiah; and the four parts of the human soul of Chiah, Neshamah,
Ruach, and Nephesh. The aces of each suit are the master cards of the suit, and
can be thought of as containing within themselves the four court cards and the
nine small cards of their respective suits.


Sulfur (Alchemical): “Sulfur is the male fiery energy of the Universe, the Rajas of
Hindu philosophy. This is the swift creative energy, the initiative of all Being.”


Sun: Atu XIX of the Thoth Tarot. See Resh.
Glossary of Thelemi and Tarot Terms                                                 309


Supernal Triad—Kether-Chokmah-Binah: The three sephiroth existing above
the Abyss. Even though each of the three sephiroth stand as separate emana-
tions, they really comprise a trinity, each unit reflecting a different aspect of the
supreme monad (Kether). In tarot, the supernal triad is home to court-card
Knights (in Chokmah) and Queens (in Binah), and to small-card aces, twos, and
threes in Kether, Chokmah, and Binah respectively.


Sword: Magical weapon representing the magician's mind. The sword represents
the Ruach (intellect) part of the soul and the Qabalistic world of Yetzirah (form-
ative world).


Swords: See Suits. In tarot readings, Swords often indicate matters of the mind,
quarreling, lawsuits, anxiety, health, and science.


Tahuti: See Thoth.

Tamas: See Gunas.


Tau—h: Mark or Cross. Hebrew equivalent to English letters Th and the
number 400. On the Tree of Life, it is path 31, joining the ninth sephira, Yesod,
with the tenth sephira, Malkuth. Represents the planet Saturn and element
earth. Tarot trump—the Universe.


Teth—t: Serpent. Hebrew equivalent to English letterT and the number nine.
On the Tree of Life, it is path 19, joining the fourth sephira, Chesed, with the
fifth sephira, Geburah. Represents the zodiac sign Leo. Tarot trump—Lust.

Tetragrammaton: YHVH—1 111 *. See Yod Hé Vau He.


Thelema: One of several words in Greek that mean “will.” The word first
received attention in 1535, when the French satirist Francois Rabelais wrote of
the Abbey of Thelema in his colossal work, Gargantua and Pantagruel. Engraved
above the entrance to the Abbey was the Abbey's motto, Fay ¢e que vouldras, “Do
what thou wilt.” In that work, it was the watchword of individual freedom. The
word appears in chapter 1, Verse 39 of The Book ofthe Law, where Nuit tells the
Scribe, “The word of the Law is @eAnpa” Among other things, Thelema has
come to be known as the philosophy of life that presumes that each individual,
like each star in the heavens, is possessed with a unique orbit and function in the
universe. This, for lack of a better word, is our will. If each person properly
understands and executes this will, his or her life will be in harmony with the
forces and energies of the entire universe and we will fulfill our full potential as
cosmic citizens.
310                                         Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot


Thelemite: One who attempts to discover, then execute, his or her will. See
Thelema.


Thoth: Tahuti, the ibis-headed Egyptian god of wisdom. Patron deity of the
tarot, Thoth is said to have taught humanity language and the written word. As
messenger of the gods, he is identified with the Greek Hermes and the Roman
Mercury.


Tiphareth—Beauty: The sixth sephira on the Tree Life; the sphere of the Sun. In
tarot, Tiphareth is the home of the court-card Princes and the small-card sixes.


TO MEGA THERION: Greek for “The Great Beast,” TO MEGA THE-
RION was the motto Crowley took upon achieving the grade of Magus, 9° = 2°
on October 12, 1915 E.v.


Tower: Atu XVI of the Thoth Tarot. See Pé.


Tree of Life—Etz ha-Chayim: Schematic representation of the fundamental
statement of the Sepher Yetzirah, which states “Deity with the aid of numbers,
letters, & words created the Universe in thirty-two mysterious paths of wisdom.
They consist of Ten sephiroth out of nothing and ofTwenty-two Letters.” The
Tree of Life is usually represented as ten circular emanations (sephiroth) joined
by twenty-two paths, to which the letters of the Hebrew alphabet are attributed.


Triplicities of the Zodiac: The twelve signs of the zodiac are categorized, accord-
ing to modes, into three groups of four signs. The Triplicities are as follows:


      Cardinal Signs: Aries, Cancer, Libra, Capricorn
      Fixed Signs: Leo, Scorpio, Aquarius, Taurus
      Mutable Signs: Sagittarius, Pisces, Gemini, Virgo


Trump: See Atu.


Typhon: Graeco-Egyptian reptilian deity associated with the active forces of
destruction. In the Thoth Tarot, Typhon appears with Hermanubis and the
Sphinx as one of the three beasts of Atu X, Fortune.


Tzaddi—3: Fish Hook. Hebrew equivalent to English letters Tz or Z and the
number ninety. On the Tree of Life, it is path 28, joining the seventh sephira,
Netzach with the ninth sephira, Yesod. Represents the zodiac sign Aries. Tarot
trump—the Emperor.
Glossary of Thelemic and Tarot Terms                                                  3


Universe: Atu XX] of the Thoth Tarot. See Tau, Saturn.


V.L-T.R.1.O.L.:The universal solvent of alchemy created by the proper combina-
tion and balancing of the alchemical elements of mercury, salt, and sulfur. Its let-
ters are the initials of the alchemical motto: Visita interiora terrae rectificando
invenies occultam lapidem—“Visit the interior parts of the earth: by rectification
thou shalt find the hidden stone.” In the Thoth Tarot, this phrase appears on Atu
XIV, Art.


Vau—1: Nail. Hebrew equivalent to English letters V, W, U, and O and the
number six. On the Tree of Life, it is path 16, joining the second sephira,
Chokmah, with the fourth sephira, Chesed. Represents the zodiac sign Taurus.
Tarot trump—the Hierophant.


Vision and the Voice: Liber XXX Aerum vel Saeculi sub figura CCCCXVII:
being the Angels of the 30 Aethyrs of the Vision and the Voice (1911 E.v.).


Wand: Magical weapon representing the magician's will. The wand represents
the Chiah (life force) part of the soul, and the Qabalistic world of Atziluth
(archetypal world).


Wands: See Suits. In tarot readings, Wands often indicate matters of power,
endeavor, struggle, business, character, career.


Yesod—Foundation: The ninth sephira on the Tree of Life; the sphere of the
Moon. In tarot, Yesod is the home of the small-card nines.


Yetzirah: See Qabalistic Worlds


Yod Hé Vau Hé—7 1% “—YHVH: The great Qabalistic Name of God, com-
monly pronounced Jehovah. Referred to as the Tetragrammaton. Qabalists cate-
gorize everything in creation, including the human soul, into four divisions, each
corresponding to one of the four letters of the Great Name. In the tarot, the suit
of Wands represents Yod; Cups, the first Hé; Vau, Swords; and the final Hé,
Disks. See Parts of the Soul and Qabalistic Worlds.


Yod—*: Hand. Hebrew equivalent to English letters Y and I and the number
ten. On the Tree of Life, it is path 20, joining the fourth sephira, Chesed, with
sixth sephira, Tiphareth. Represents the zodiac sign Virgo. Tarot trump—the
Hermit.
312                                         Understanding Aleister Crowley’s Thoth Tarot


Zain—*: Sword. Hebrew equivalent to English letter Z and the number seven.
On the Tree of Life, it is path 17, joining the third sephira, Binah, with the sixth
sephira, Tiphareth. Represents the zodiac sign Gemini. Tarot trump—the
Lovers.
                                       NOTES

                                            C7)


TITLE PAGE
  1. From “The Rites of Eleusis, The Rite of Mercury, "Te Equinox I (6), (reprint, York
        Beach, ME: Weiser Books, 1992). Supplement, p. 103.


Part I
  1. Aleister Crowley, The Book of
                                Thoth by The Master Therion:
                                                           A Short Essay on the Tarot
        ofthe Egyptians (London: O.T.O.,1944); The Equinox III (5), (reprint, York Beach,
        ME: Samuel Weiser, 1992), p. 3. All quotes from The Book of
                                                                 Thoth that follow are
        from this edition.
       . A nonprofit corporation based on the mystical-occult teachings and practice of the
        Holy Qabalah and Sacred Tarot, founded by Dr. Paul Foster Case, extended by Dr.
        Ann Davies. International Headquarters: 5101 North Figueroa Strect, Los
        Angeles, CA 90042.
  3. Lon Milo DuQyette, My Life with the Spirits (York Beach, ME: Weiser Books,
        Inc., 1999), pp. 68-70.
  4. The Confessions ofAleister Crowley (London, 1929; abridged one-volume edition, ed.
        John Symonds and Kenneth Grant, London, 1969; reprint, London and New York:
        Arkana, 1989).
  5. Judith Hawkins-Tillirson is a senior buyer for a major book distribution company
        and one of the most knowledgeable and respected professionals in the field of eso-
        teric literature. She is a dear friend of the family, and was kind enough to pen the
        Introduction to my Tarot of Ceremonial Magick (York Beach, ME: Weiser Books,
         1995).
  On   . Aleister Crowley to Mr. Pearson, photoengraver, May 29, 1942.
       . Nee Marguerite Frieda Bloxam, 1877-1962.
314                                                                                         Notes


      . Harris first exhibited some of the paintings in 1941 and 1942. However, it is clear
       that she continued working for nearly a year after that on one or more versions that
       would eventually be included in the Thoth Tarot.
      . 1875-1947.
      . By 1920, Crowley still held the world’s record for a number of mountaineering
        feats, including the greatest pace uphill (4, 000 feet in 83 minutes) at over 16, 000
       feet on Mexico's Iztaccihuatl in 1900; the first ascent of the Nevado de Toluca by a
       solitary climber 1901; and his 1902 assault on K2, where he spent 65 days on the
       Baltoro glacier.
  11. Ghostwriting for Evangeline Adams, Crowley wrote the bulk of the material first
       published under her name, including her classic texts, Astrology: Your Place in the
       Sun (1927) and Astrology: Your Place Among the Stars (1930). These works made
       astrology a household word in America and Europe and catapulted Adams to cele-
       brated status as “Astrologer to Wall Street and Washington.” Recently, Crowley’s
       co-authorship has been graciously acknowledged by the Adams estate and has
       resulted in the release of Aleister Crowley and Evangeline Adams, The General
       Principles of Astrology (York Beach, ME: Red Wheel / Weiser, 2001).
  12. It is often forgotten that the United States was very close to entering the First
       World War on Germany's side. Much to the horror of the German Foreign
       Ministry, Crowley's editorials made it appear that it was Germany's intention (in
       fact, its foreign policy) to engage in unrestricted submarine warfare against civilian
       shipping. Even though this was, at the time, an outrageous falsehood, Crowley's
       editorials were used to create an anti-German hysteria that would eventually sweep
       the United States into the conflict on England’s side. In a very real way, Aleister
      Crowley saved his beloved England using only his pen as a magical wand.
  13. Tan (Lancaster) Fleming (1908-1964)—pseudonym, Atticus—British journalist,
       secret service agent, writer, whose most famous creation was superhero James
       Bond, Agent 007. Crowley and Fleming were indeed friends. Copies of their corre-
       spondence still exists, some of which discuss matters of occult propaganda and the
       interrogation of Rudolf Hess.
  14. He called his system “Scientific Illuminism.” Its motto: “The Method of Science—
       The Aim of Religion.”
  15. Michele Jackson of the American Tarot Association writes, “My observations
       would lead me to believe that [among professional Tarot readers] the Thoth deck is
       second only to Rider-Waite as the most popular.”
  16. Originally published in an edition limited to 200 numbered and signed copies,
       1944. Reprinted by Samuel Weiser, Inc., 1969, 1974, 1986, 1991.
  17. The Book ofThoth, p. 4.
  18. Crowley responded to this on December 19, 1939, by writing, “You can’t get out of
       it like that. I believe the basis of the feeling is that there should be a special prerog-
       ative to understand spiritual matters, a feeling of heirship. The fact remains that
       you do not employ such arrogant impertinence with regard to such subjects as logic
       and mathematics. Bertrand Russell is certainly a thousand times more difÏcult than
       ever I am, but you understand him better because you accept the postulate, that
       subjects like these must be worked at, as with you are annoyed.”
  19. Israel Regardie, The Eye in the Triangle (Scottsdale, AZ: New Falcon Press, 1989),
       p. 59.
Notes                                                                                       315


  20. Regardie, The Eye in the Triangle; Lawrence Sutin, Do What Thou Wilt:
                                                                          A Life of
        Aleister Crowley (New York: St. Martin's Press, 2000); Roger Hutchinson, Aleister
        Crowley: The Beast Demystified (Edinburgh: Mainstream Publishing, 1998); and
        especially Richard Kaczynski, Perdurabo: The Life ofAleister Crowley (Scottsdale,
        AZ. New Falcon Press, 2002).
  21. From George M. Lamsa, trans., The Holy Biblefrom Ancient Eastern Manuscripts
        (Philadelphia, PA: A. J. Holman Company, 1967), p. 961.
  22. Sephiroth is the plural form; sephira is the singular form.
  23. Harris to Aleister Crowley—January 28, 1940.
  24. This letter is from the personal correspondence of the author.
  25. On May 11, 1938, she was formally initiated by Crowley and took as her magical
        name Soror TZBA, a Hebrew word meaning “hosts” (also “army,” “arduous, ” and
        “busy”). TZBA in Hebrew enumerates to the sacred Thelemic number 93.
  26. Susan Roberts, Magician ofthe Golden Dawn (Chicago, IL: Contemporary Books,
        Inc., 1978). p. 309.
  27. Co-Masonry, under the sponsorship of the Theosophical Society, operates the
        three Blue Lodge degrees of Freemasonry, and allows both men and women as
        members.
  28. The concept of the Holy Guardian Angel is a key element in the Western magical
        tradition in general and Crowley's Scientific I//uminism in particular. See chapter 11.
  29. The Equinox | (8), ed. Soror Virakam, (reprint, York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser,
        1992).
  30. Crowley to Harris, December 19, 1939.
  31. Two program essays are known to exist. The first, obviously an edited version of
        Crowley's notes, carried the ponderous title Exhibition ofPlaying Cards: The Tarot
        (Book of Thoth) 78 Paintings According to the Initiated Tradition and Modern Scientific
        Thought with Other Occult and Alchemical Designs. The second, written for the
        Berkeley exhibition, was written by Harris's friend Robert Cecil and was simply
        titled Exhibition of 78 Paintings ofthe Tarot Cards by Frieda Harris.
  32. 1918-1985. Major Grady Louis McMurtry would also be instrumental in rescuing
        Crowley's magical society, Ordo Templi Orientis, from certain extinction. In the
        1970s, my wife, Constance, and I had the great privilege to receive our early O.T.O.
        degree initiations from this remarkable and extremely colorful man.
  33. In 1977, through the kind efforts of Mr. Gerald Yorke and Mr. Stephen Skinner,
        the paintings were again photographed and the new prints used to greatly enhance
        the quality of subsequent editions of the Thoth Tarot.
  34. A handful of atrociously reproduced prototype decks were manufactured in 1944.
        Neither Crowley nor Harris appears to have profited by this venture.
  35. July 23, 1958, letter to Edward Bryant from the collection of Mr. Clive Harper.
  36. The Book ofThoth, p. xii.
  37. Harris to Crowley, date uncertain.
  38. Or Projective Synthetic Geometry.
  39. 1861-1925.
    . Aleister Crowley, The Book ofthe Law, I: 64 (York Beach, ME: Weiser Books,
        1976).
  41. Aleister Crowley, The Equinox ofthe Gods (London: O.T.O., 1936; The Equinox III
316                                                                                          Notes


        (3), corrected facsimile editions (Scottsdale, AZ: New Falcon Publications, 1991)
        and (New York: 93 Publishing, 1992).
  42. On the Stéle, Nuit, the goddess of the night sky, is seen stretching herself over the
        top and sides of the Stéle. As the personification of an infinitely expanded universe,
      we could symbolize her as the circumference of an ever-expanding circle.
  43. On the Stéle, Hadit is the god pictured as a winged solar disk directly beneath the
        heart of Nuit. As the personification of an infinitely contracted point we could
        symbolize him as an ever-present point at the very center of an ever-expanding
        circle.
      . He did no such thing, but the story of why he chose to say that he did must be read
        in its entirety to appreciate Crowley’s outrageously twisted sense of humor. (See
        The Confessions ofAleister Crowley.)
  45. Lamsa, The Holy Biblefrom Ancient Eastern Manuscripts, 2 Kings U1: 23-25.
      . The Book ofthe Law, 1: 49.
  47.   Ra-Hoor-Khuit is the active aspect of the god Horus. His passive aspect is repre-
        sented by his twin brother, Hoor-pa-kraat (whom the Greeks called Harpocrates).
  48. In most traditional tarot decks, the four Kerubic beasts appear in the corners of the
        trumps Fortune and the Universe.
  49. As tarot scholar Bob O’Neal points out, the sequence of trumps 13 through 21
        could easily serve as flash cards illustrating the events of The Book of the
        Revelation.
  50. Biblical tradition holds that, after the great flood, God promised Noah he would
        never again destroy “all flesh” by water, but that the next great ethnic cleansing
        would be by fire.
  51. For an expanded account of the mythical adventures of Egyptian archetypal
        Mother-Father-Child, see Lon Milo DuQuette, The Magick of Thelema (York
        Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, Inc., 1993), p. 8.
  52. These directions represent the situation in the Northern Hemisphere. For the
        Southern Hemisphere, the directions are, of course, reversed.
  53. This section was first published as part of an article for the Golden Dawn Journal
        (St. Paul, MN: Llewellyn Publications, 1995.) It was later published in its entirety
        in Angels, Demons and Gods ofthe New Millennium (York Beach, ME: Weiser
        Books, and Lon Milo DuQuette, 1997).
  54. Aleister Crowley, Liber Cheth vel Vallum Abiegni.
  55. To induce the visions of The Vision and The Voice Crowley utilized Enochian
        magick, a powerful technique of ceremonial skrying (or traveling the spirit vision)
        first used by Edward Kelley and Dr.John Dee, the famous English mathematician
        and counselor to Elizabeth I. By reciting a series of Calls or Keys in the angelic lan-
        guage, Crowley systematically penetrated, in visions, the thirty Aethyrs or heavens
        of the Enochian celestial universe.
  56. The Equinox | (5), London; (reprint, York Beach, ME: Weiser Books, 1992). Also
      see Aleister Crowley, The Vision and The Voice with Commentary and Other Papers,
      (York Beach, ME: Weiser Books, 1998), p. 67.
  57. Even an hour or two of research will prove to the objective student that these terms
      (and many others in Crowley's writings) are merely very scary terms for very holy
        concepts.
Notes                                                                                       317


  58. The concept of personal guardian spirits that stand between humanity and the gods
        is ancient and universal. Zoroaster wrote of the Agathodaimon; the Platonic
        philosophers, Daemones; Socrates called his Genius.
  59. “He will see annihilation where the perfected one finds immortality.” The Buddha
    . DuQuette, Angels, Demons, and Gods, p. 24.
  61. The Equinox, IV (2) (reprint, York Beach, ME: Red Wheel /Weiser, 1999).
  62. Frater Achad (Charles Stanfield Jones), De Mysterits Rosae Rubeae et Aureae Crucis.
        Privately published, date unknown.
  63. At the time, I was an active member of Abdiel Lodge of the Rosicrucian Order,
        AMORC, in Long Beach, California.
    . “Magister Iesus Christus—Deus est Homo—Beneductus Dominus Deus Noster qui dedit
        nobis Signum ... "—“beneath is written the Mystic Name of the owner of the
        cross.”
  65. “Kabbalah” is the preferred spelling among orthodox Jewish students. “Cabala” is
        the spelling variation most often used by Christian mystics. “Qabalah” is usually
        associated with the nonsectarian Hermetic applications of the art.
    . The Book of
               Thoth, p. 34.
  67. The Sepher Yetzirah, see chapter 9.
  68. The Sun (the God of our solar system) was viewed by the ancients as being sur-
        rounded by the six remaining “planets,” a concept that consecrated the number six
        as the sacred symbol of the macrocosm and deity.
  69. The fourth element, earth, is a combination of fire, water, and air. Earth will even-
        tually manifest as a separate element when the arms of the Great Cross are formed.
  70. Don't waste time worrying about the correct pronunciation of Hebrew words.
        There are several
                    main dialects, and it is certain that any attempt you make will be
        ridiculed by someone. Pronounce them any way that is comfortable for you.
  71. The Book of Thoth, p. 89.
  72. DuQuette, Magick ofThelema, pp. 60-61.
  73. The Book ofThoth, p. 18.
  74, The Book of    Thoth, p. 83.
  75. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 90.
  76. Recall from chapter 1, the two-fingered V for victory Crowley is said to have
        imparted to Winston Churchill to counteract the Nazi’s solar symbol, the swastika.
  77. In the Waite/Smith deck and many others, trump XX, the Last Judgment, shows a
        man, woman, and child arising from their tombs on judgment day. The woman is
        making the sign of the mourning of Isis, the child is making the sign of Apophis
        and Typhon, and the man is making the sign of Osiris risen.
  78. The Book ofThoth, p. 30.
  79. Rev. Dr. Isidor Kalisch, Sepher Yezirah—A Book on Creation; or, TheJewish
        Metaphysics of Remote Antiquity (New York: L. H. Frank & Co. 1877). Reprinted by
        The Supreme Council of The Ancient and Mystical Order Rosae Crucis, 1971.
        This passage is taken from chapter 1, section 1. By tradition, authorship of the
        Sepher Yetzirah is ascribed to the patriarch Abraham. This is highly doubtful, but
        the text is very ancient—perhaps the oldest philosophical treatise written in
        Hebrew.
    . The preexistent negativity is expressed as Ain (nothing), Ain Soph (without limit),
        and Ain Soph Aur (the limitless light).
                                                                                       Notes


 81. DuQuette, Angels, Demons and Gods, p. 21.
 82. The Book ofThoth, p. 180.
 83. The Book of Thoth, p. 179.
 84. The Book ofThoth, p. 182.
 85. The Book ofThoth, p. 182.
   . The Book of Thoth, p. 182.
 87. The Book ofThoth, p. 185.
 88. The Book ofThoth, p. 187.
 89. Yes, even the Three of Swords, Sorrow, is happy. See chapter 19.
   . Two of the tarot trumps, the Aeon (Fire) and the Universe (Saturn) serve also to
     represent respectively the elements of spirit and earth, and so, instead of 88 colors
     (4 x 22), the total number of colors for the trumps is 96 (4 x 24).
 91. The Book of
              Thoth, pp. 278-281.
 92. See chapter 13 regarding “Tzaddi is not the Star.”
 93. Two additional lines are added to the 1-32 Key scale to accommodate the dual
     attributes of the Aeon and the Universe. They are designated “32bis” for the earth
     attribute of the Universe (Tau), and “31bis” for the spirit attribute of the Acon
     (Shin).
 94, The curious capitalization styles that characterize the names of various colors are
     indicative of how they were originally commercially identified. 1 have done my best
     to reproduce the original references throughout the tables and text.
 95. The aces are a category of their own.
 96. Harris was also burdened with having to repeatedly redo each painting. Her letters
     refer to more than a few instances where her repeated striping of the delicate
     watercolors affected the ideal coloring of the finished painting.
 97. DuQuette, Angels, Demons and Gods, p. 59.
 98. Aleister Crowley, with Mary Desti and Leila Waddell, Magich—Liber ABA—Book
     Four—Part IIT, Second one-volume edition, revised and enlarged, (York Beach,
     ME: Weiser Books, 1997), p. 275.
   . The Book ofthe Sacred Magic ofAbra-Melin the Mage as Delivered by Abraham the Jew
     Unto His Son Lamech, a Grimoire ofthe Fifteenth Century (London: Watkins, 1900);
     (reprinted NY: Dover Publications, Inc, 1975); most recent edition,
     Wellingborough, UK: Aquarian Press, 1983.
100. See Ruth Majereik, trans., The Chaldean Oracles ofZoroaster. (London and New
     York: Brill, 1989).
101. DuQuette, Angels, Demons and Gods., p. 51.
102. The Book ofThoth, p. 89. As a reminder, “redintigration” is an archaic word meaning
     restoration to a former state.
103. The Equinox
               1 (5), (reprint, York Beach, ME: Weiser Books, 1992), p. 76.
104. Lon Milo DuQuette, The Chicken Qabalab ofRabbi Lamed Ben Clifford (York
     Beach, ME: Weiser Books, 2001), pp. 171-172.
105. DuQuette, The Magick of
                          Thelema, p. 124.
106. Donald Michael Kraig, Modern Sex Magick (St. Paul, MN: Llewellyn Publications,
     1998), p. 361.
Notes                                                                                       319


Part II
   1. Lon Milo DuQuette.
   2. First edition published in 1938 by Ordo Templi Orientis, London. Revised edition.
      (Scottsdale, AZ: New Falcon Publications, 1992.)
   3. Titles vary among different decks. For example: King, Queen, Knight, Page; King,
      Queen, Prince, and Princess.
   4. The theoryI personally prefer holds that the Major Arcana expresses the dynamics
          of Briah, and the Minor Arcana that of Yetzirah. But, as each suit is an harmonic
          expression of one of the four Qabalistic worlds, the characterizations of any given
          card can become extremely difÏcult to follow.
         . The Book of
                    Thoth, p. 44.
         . The Book of
                    Thoth, p. 189.
   NAW   . Demiourgos or Demiurge, a creator god who mistakenly thinks it is the Supreme
          Deity. Tetragrammaton is Latin for #1 151* YHVH the Hebrew Demiourgos.
   8. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 189.
   9. The Book of the Law, 1: 57.
  10. See Robert O'Neill, Tarot Symbolism (Lima, OH: Fairway Press, 1986), p. 293.
  11. The Book of the Law, 1:57.
  12. Harris to Crowley, September 18, 1939.
  13. Aleister Crowley, The Law Is for All (Scottsdale, AZ: New Falcon Publications,
          1991), p.142.
  14. The Book of theLaw, 1: 57.
  15. The Book of the Law, 1: 57.
  16. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 77.
  17. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 75.
  18. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 67.
  19. Aleister Crowley, 777 and Other Qabalistic Writings (York Beach, ME: Weiser
      Books, Inc. 1986), Column CLXXXI, p. 34.
  20. Aleister Crowley, “General Characters of the Trumps as They Appear in Use, "The
          Book of
               Thoth, pp. 253-254.
  21. Harris to Crowley, date uncertain.
  22. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 118.
  23. See chapter 8.
  24. See the Chariot.
  25. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 69.
  26. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 69.
  27. Crowley, 777 and Other Qabalistic Writings, Column CLXXXI], p. 34.
  28. The Book of Thoth, p. 254.
  29. Harris to Crowley, May 11, 1941.
  30. See Aleister Crowley, The Vision and The Voice, p. 211.
  31. The Book ofThoth, p. 69.
  32. The Book ofThoth, p. 70.
  33. The Book ofThoth, p. 72.
  34. Liber Magi, wv. 7-10, and The Book of
                                         Thoth, p. 71.
  35. I welcome this opportunity to disabuse whoever it was who suggested that, in this
          card, Mercury is standing tiptoe upon the tip of a surfboard-shaped altar.
320                                                                                   Notes


  36. Crowley, 777 and Other Qabalistic Writings, Column CLXXXI, p. 34.
  37. The Book of Thoth, p. 254.
  38. The Book of Thoth, p. 112.
  39. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 74.
      . The Book of
                 Thoth, p. 73.
  41, Olive Whicher, Sunspace: Sctence at a Threshold ofSpiritual Understanding (London:
       Rudolf Steiner Press, 1989).
  42. Compare with the Queen of Cups.
  43. The Book of     Thoth, p. 73.
      . Crowley, 777 and Other Qabalistic Writings, Column CLXXX1], p. 34.
  45. The Book of Thoth, p. 255.
      . The Book of
                 Thoth, p. 75.
  47. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 75.
      . The Book of
                 Thoth, p. 77.
  49. Aleister Crowley, Orpheus, Liber Primus Vel Carminum in Collected Works, vol. II]
       (Foyers, Society for the Propagation of Religious Truth, 1907; reprint, Chicago, IL:
       Yogi Publications), p. 155.
  50. Crowley, 777 and Other Qabalistic Writings, Column CLXXXtI, p. 34.
  51. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 259.
  52. Harris to Crowley, May 21, 1941.
  53. The Book ofThoth, p. 78.
  54. The Book of the Law, 1: 57.
  55. The Book ofThoth, p. 77.
  56. The Book ofThoth, p. 77.
      . The Book of
                 Thoth, p. 79.
  58. Crowley 777 and Other Qabalistic Writings, Column CLXXXI, p. 34.
  59. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 255.
      . Harris to Crowley, January 28, 1940.
  61. The Book of the Law, 11:11.
  62. The Book of Thoth, p. 79.
  63. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 79.
      . Crowley, Viston and the Voice, p. 67.
  65. Crowley777 and Other Qabalistic Writings, Column CLXXXI, p. 34.
      . The Book of Thoth, p. 256.
  67. Harris to Crowley, date uncertain.
  68. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 83.
  69. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 82.
  70. We will find the upward arrow in the Art card.
  71. CrowleyVision and The Voice, p. 202.
  72. Crowley, 777 and Other Qabalistic Writings, Column CLXXXI, p. 34.
  73. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 256.
  74, Harris to Crowley, May 11, 1941.
  75. Crowley, Vision and The Voice, pp. 148, 149.
  76. The Book of Thoth, p. 256.
  77. Crowley, 777 and Other Qabalistic Writings, Column CLXXXI, p. 34.
  78. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 256.
  79. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 88.
Notes                                                                                     321


  80. Harris to Crowley sometime between November 3 and December 19, 1939.
  81. Crowley to Harris, December 19, 1939.
  82. Aubrey Beardsley (1872-1898), brilliant and controversial artist and illustrator.
  83. Harris to Crowley, July 12, (1940?).
  84. See comments on Atu XX], the Universe.
  85. The Book of Thoth, p. 86.
  86. Crowley, 777 and Other Qabalistic Writings, Column CLXXXI, p. 34.
  87. The Book of Thoth, p. 257.
  88. Harris to Crowley, November 30, 1939.
  89. The Book ofThoth, p. 89.
    . The Book of
               Thoth, p. 89.
  91. The Book of    Thoth, p. 89.
  92. The obsolete theory of preformationism posits that prior to conception, living
        beings exist microscopically fully formed.
  93. Crowley, 777 and Other Qabalistic Writings, Column CLXXX], p. 34.
  94. The Book ofThoth, pp. 253-260.
  95. Harris to Crowley, May 10, 1939.
  96. The Book ofThoth, p. 90.
  97. See chapter 8.
  98. In rough Latin, “That central thing in the middle of three other things.”
  99. Aleister Crowley et al., from “The Rite ofJupiter, ” and “The Rites of Eleusis,” The
        Equinox \ (6), Supplement, p. 25.
 100. Crowley, 777 and Other Qabalistic Writings, Column      CLXXXI, p. 34.
 101. The Book ofThoth, pp. 253-260.
 102. Letter from Frieda Harris to Aleister Crowley, March 25, 1942.
 103. Later in Crowley's visionary cycle the spelling of the goddess's name changes to
        “Babalon.” See Crowley and The Vision and The Voice, p. 159.
 104. Seven aspects of Crowley as the Beast. “The Head of an Angel: the head of a Saint:
        the head of a Poet: the head of an Adulterous Woman: the head of a Man of
        Valour: the head of a Satyr: and the head of a Lion-Serpent.” See Aleister Crowley,
        The Book ofLies (York Beach, ME: Red Wheel / Weiser, 1981), p.108.
 105. Crowley, Vision and The Voxe, p. 150.
 106. Crowley, 777 and Other Qabalistic Writings, .Column CLXXXI, p. 34.
 107. The Book of
               Thoth, pp. 253-260.
 108. Harris to Crowley, November/December (date uncertain) 1939.
 109. Crowley to Harris, December 19, 1939.
 110. The Book of    Thoth, p. 97.
 111. The Book ofThoth, p. 96.
 112. The Book ofThoth, p. 97.
 113. The Book of Thoth, p. 96.
 114. The Book ofThoth, p. 96.
 115. Crowley, 777 and Other Qabalistic Writings, Column CLXXXI, p. 34.
 116. The Book ofThoth, pp. 253-260.
 117. Harris to Crowley, November/December (date uncertain) 1939.
 118. The Book of Thoth, p. 99.
 119. The Book of Thoth, pp. 99, 100.
 120. The Book of    Thoth, p. 100.
322                                                                                  Notes


 121. The Book ofThoth, p. 100.
 122. The Book ofThoth, p. 103.
 123. The Book ofThoth, p. 100.
 124. Crowley, 777 and Other Qabalistic Writings, Column CLXXXI, p. 34.
 125. The Book of Thoth, pp. 253-260.
 126. Harris to Crowley, (date uncertain) 1939.
 127. The Book of Thoth, p. 102.
 128. The Book of Thoth, p. 103.
 129. Crowley, 777 and Other Qabalistic Writings, Column CLXXXI, p. 34.
 130. The Book ofThoth, pp. 253-260.
 131. Aleister Crowley, Magick, Liber ABA, Book Four. 2nd ed. rev., ed. Hymenaeus Beta,
      (York Beach, ME: Weiser Books, 1994), p. 277.
 132. The Book of Thoth, p. 105.
 133. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 107.
 134. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 106.
 135. From Aleister Crowley, Konx Om Pax (Chicago, IL: Teitan Press, 1990), p. 10.
 136. Crowley, 777 and Other Qabalistic Writings, Column CLXXXI, p. 34.
 137. The Book of Thoth, pp. 253-260.
 138. Harris to Crowley, date uncertain.
 139. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 107.
 140. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 108.
 141. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 109.
 142. The Book ofThoth, pp. 108-109.
 143. Crowley, 777 and Other Qabalistic Writings, Column       CLXXXI, p. 34.
 144. The Book of Thoth, pp. 253-260.
 145. Harris to Crowley, date uncertain.
 146. The Book ofThoth, p. 109.
 147. The Book of Thoth, p. 109.
 148. Aleister Crowley, Liber LXV, from The Holy Books of Thelema (York Beach, ME:
      Weiser Books, Inc., 1983), p. 83.
 149. The Book of the Law 1: 58.
 150. Crowley, 777 and Other Qabalistic Writings, Column CLXXXI, p. 34.
 151. The Book of   Thoth, pp. 253-260. The version from Crowley's The Heart ofthe Master
      (Scottsdale, AZ. New Falcon Publications, 1999) contains the additional line
      “(Roll up the Excrement ofthe Earth, to create a Star!"
 152. The Book of Thoth, p. 112.
 153. The Book of Thoth, p. 112.
 154. The Book ofThoth, p. 113.
 155. Crowley, 777 and Other Qabalistic Writings, Column CLXXXI, p. 34.
 156. The Book of
               Thoth, pp. 253-260.
 157. The Book of the Law, 1: 3.
 158. The Book of Thoth, p. 113.
 159. The Book of the Law. The spelling varies in the texts.
 160. The Book ofthe Law Il: 35: “The half
                                        of the word of Heru-ra-ha, called Hoor-pa-
      kraat and Ra-Hoor-Khut.”
 161. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 114.
 162. Crowley, 777 and Other Qabalistic Writings, Column CLXXXI, p. 34.
Notes                                                                                      383

 163. The Book ofThoth, pp. 253-260.
 164. The Book ofthe Law, 1: 49.
 165. The Book ofthe Law, Il, 3, 4.
 166. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 116.
 167. Crowley, 777 and Other Qabalistic Writings, Column CLXXXI, p. 34.
 168. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 260.
 169. Harris to Crowley, date uncertain.
 170. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 118.
 171. The Book of
               Thoth, pp. 116, 117.
 172. The Canon was first published in 1897 by Elkin Matthews. The second edition
        was published by Research into Lost Knowledge Organisation in association with
        The Garnstone Press in 1974. Third edition published in 1981 by Research into
        Lost Knowledge Organisation, 8 The Drive, New Southgate, London N11 2DY.
        Distributed by Thorson’s publishers Limited, Wellingborough, Northamptonshire.
 173. Numbers 2:2.
 174. The zodiacal year can be divided into seventy-two quinaries, or periods of five
        degrees. Each of the thirty-six small cards of the tarot represents two quinaries or
        one decan.
 175. First edition, London: Ernest Benn LTD., 1928.
 176. The Book of Thoth, p. 119.
 177. See glossary, chapter 21.
 178. The Book of Thoth, p. 118.
 179. Or, if you prefer—elevated his initiatory consciousness from that represented by the
        fourth sephira, Chesed, to that of the third Sephira, Binah.
 180. Crowley, The Vision and The Voice .
 181. Crowley, The Vision and The Voice, pp. 174, 175.
 182. Crowley, Konx Om Pax, p. 10.
 183. Crowley, Konx Om Pax, p. 7.
 184. Rabbi Lamed Ben Clifford.
 185. The Book ofThoth, p. 177.
 186. Matti Pitkanen. Department of Physics, Theoretical Physics Division, 2000.
 187. The Book of
               Thoth, p.177.
 188. Harris to Crowley, date uncertain.
 189. The Book of Thoth, p. 188.
 190. This paraphrased from Crowley's comment on the Ace of Cups, The Book ofThoth,
         195.
 191.   The Book ofThoth, p. 195.
 192. The Book ofThoth, p. 79.
 193. The Book ofThoth, p. 202.
 194. The Book of    Thoth, p. 203.
 195. Crowley, Magick, Liber ABA, Book Four, p. 86.
 196. The Book of Thoth, p. 211.
 197. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 149.
 198. I believe, at the moment, her marvelous essay is only published on her website
        bttp://members.cts.com/king/s/saoirse/TarotCards.html, Copyright, © 1999.
 199. Isabel Briggs Myers, Gifts Differing, (Consulting Psychologists Press, Palo Alto),
        1995.
324                                                                                  Notes


 200. Arthur Rosengarten, Psychology and Tarot: Spectrums ofPossibility (New York:
       Paragon House, 2000).
 201. The entire zodiacal year is divided into 360 degrees, and each of the twelve signs of
       the zodiac is composed of thirty degrees.
                                             The thirty-degree period of a zodiac sign
       is divided into three ten-degree periods called decans.
 202. The Book of Thoth, p. 151.
 203. The Book of Thoth, p. 152.
 204. The Book of Thoth, p. 153.
 205. The Book ofThoth, p. 154.
 206. See Leon Engers-Kennedy’s famous painting of Crowley in Equinox III (1).
 207. The Book of Thoth, p. 153, 154.
 208. Harris to Crowley—date uncertain.
 209. The Book ofThoth, p. 155.
 210. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 155.
 211. The Book ofThoth, p. 156.
 212. The Book ofThoth, p. 156.
 213. The Book of Thoth, p. 156.
 214. The Book of Thoth, p. 157.
 215. This is just the kind of comment one would expect from a Queen of Cups.
 216. The Book ofThoth, p. 157.
 217. The Book ofThoth, p. 158.
 218. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 158.
 219. The Book of Thoth, p. 158.
 220. The Book of Thoth, p. 159.
 221. Harris to Crowley, date uncertain.
 222. The Book of   Thoth, p. 160.
 223   The Book of Thoth, p. 161.
 224. The Book of Thoth, p. 161.
 225. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 161.
 226. The Book of Thoth, p. 163.
 227. The Book of Thoth, p. 162.
 228. The Book ofThoth, p. 162.
 229. The Book of Thoth, p. 163.
 230. The Book of Thoth, p. 163.
 231. Harris to Crowley, November 3, 1939.
 232. The Book of Thoth, p. 164.
 233. The Book of Thoth, p. 166
 234. The Book ofThoth, p. 166.
 235. The Book of Thoth, p. 166.
 236. The Book of   Thoth, p. 166.
 237. The Book of Thoth, p. 166.
 238. Harris to Crowley—date uncertain.
 239. The Book ofThoth, p. 167.
 240. The Book of Thoth, p. 167.
 241. Harris to Crowley, December 11, 1942.
 242. The Book of Thoth, p. 169.
 243. The Book of Thoth, p. 149.
Notes                                                                                       325


 244. The Book of Thoth, p. 169.
 245. The Book ofThoth, p. 169.
 246. The Book of Thoth, p. 171.
 247. Lon Milo DuQuette, Tarot ofCeremonial Magick, (York Beach, ME: Red
        Wheel/Weiser, 1995), p. 121.
 248. Obviously, because there are seven planets and thirty-six decans, we are left at the
        end of the year with one extra decan. This is remedied by having Mars repeat at the
        end ofwinter  and the beginningof  spring—to give, as it were, an extra dose of
        energy to overcome winter. Don’t blame me. I didn’t invent this system!
 249. Joan Quigley, Astrology for Adults (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1969),
        p. 131.
 250. The Book ofThoth, p. 178.
 251. The Book of Thoth, p. 189.
 252. They are actually Phurbas or Kilas, the Tibetan triple-sided ritual
        dagger/nail/dart/spike.
 253. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 189.
 254. On the Tree ofLife, the sixth sephira, Tiphareth, is by tradition the sphere of the
        Sun.
 255. The Book of Thoth, p. 178.
 256. The Book ofThoth, p. 190.
 257. The Book ofThoth, p. 182.
 258. The Book of Thoth, p. 182.
 259. The Book of Thoth, p. 193.
 260. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 193.
 261. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 193.
 262. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 186.
 263. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 185.
 264. The Book of
               Thoth, pp. 193, 194.
 265. The Book ofThoth, p. 186.
     . The Book of
                Thoth, p. 194.
 267. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 194.
 268. The Book of
               Thoth, pp. 194, 195.
 269. Harris to Crowley, March 25, 1942.
 270. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 196.
 271. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 196.
 272. The Book ofThoth, p. 196.
 273. The Book ofThoth, p. 197.
 274. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 199.
 275. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 182.
 276. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 200.
 277. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 184.
 278. “Countin’ Flowers On the Wall,” written by Lew Dewitt. © Wallflower
        Music/Copyright Management.
 279. The Book ofThoth, p. 184.
 280. The Book of
               Thotd, p. 201.
 281. Crowley to Harris, December 19, 1939.
 282. DuQuette, Tarot of Ceremonial Magick, p. 166.
326                                                                                   Notes


 283. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 202.
 284. Harris to Crowley, date uncertain.
 285. Harris to Crowley, November 3, 1939.
 286. The Book of Thoth, p. 205.
 287. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 205.
 288. The Book of Thoth, p. 205.
 289. Harris to Crowley, November 3, 1939.
 290. The Book ofThoth, p. 183.
 291. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 207.
 292. The Book of Thoth, p. 186.
 293. The Book of Thoth, p. 208.
 294. The Book of Thoth, pp. 208, 209.
 295. Harris to Crowley, September 18, 1939.
 296. The Book ofThoth, p. 209.
 297. The Book of Thoth, p. 212.
 298. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 178.
 299. Aleister Crowley, Liber LXV, Liber Cordis Cincti Sepente, subfigura 31 ® from The
      Holy Books ofThelema, p. 66.
 300. Harris to Crowley, January 7, 1940.
 301. The Book of
               Thoth, pp. 212, 213.
 302. See chapter 8, and Fortune.
               Thoth, p. 213.
 303. The Book of
 304. See “The Rites of Eleusis, ” The Equinox I (6), Supplement p. 10.
 305. See Five of Swords.
 306. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 181.
 307. The Book of Thoth, p. 215.
 308. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 215.
 309. The Book of Thoth, p. 215.
 310. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 183.
 311. The Book of Thoth, p. 216.
 312. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 216.
 313. The Book ofThoth, p. 187.
 314. The Book of Thoth, p. 217.
 315. I cannot resist mentioning that the Egyptian ibis, the long-beaked water bird
      sacred to Thoth, was known even in ancient times for its ability to use its beak to
      self-administer enemas.
 316. The Book ofThoth, p. 217.
 317. The Book ofThoth, p. 188.
 318. Harris to Crowley, date uncertain.
 319. Frater Perdurabo (Aleister Crowley). Aleister Crowley, Tarot Divination (York
      Beach, ME: Red Wheel / Weiser, 1976), p. 300.
 320. Aleister Crowley Memorandum regarding “Stipend"—date uncertain.
 321. The Equinox vol. 1. (reprint, York Beach, ME: Weiser Books 1992).
 322. From “A Description of the Cards of the Tarot with their Attribution; Including a
      Method of Divination by Their Use, "Equinox, I (7), pp. 206-210).
 323. Crowley is assuming that the Significator is a court card. The counting begins with
Notes                                                                                        327


        the Significator in the direction the figure in the card is facing. This is not always
        easy to determine in the Thoth Tarot.—Ed.
 324. DuQuette, The Book ofThoth, pp. 253-260.
 325. A Description of the Cards, Equinox, I (7), pp.143-210.
 326. See description of original design, page 263.
 327. The Magick of
                 Thelema, p. 216.
 328. The Book ofThoth, p. 85.
 329. The Book ofThoth, p. 37.
 330. The Magick ofThelema, p. 216.
 331. The Equinox I (5).
 332. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 90.
 333. The Book ofThoth, p. 115.
 334. The Magick ofThelema, p. 80.
 335. The Book ofThoth, p. 70.
 336. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 85.
 337. The Book of Thoth, p. 85.
 338. DuQuette, The Magick of
                           Thelema, p. 80
 339. The Book ofThoth, p. 85.
 340. DuQuette, The Magick ofThelema, p. 81.
 341. The Book of
               Thoth, p.75.
 342. The Book of
               Thoth, p. 79.
 343. Paraphrased from Kalisch, Sepher Yezirah, p. 14.
                          BIBLIOGRAPHY
                                             wy

                                          CA


Abraham the Jew. The Book ofthe Sacred Magic ofAbra~Melin the Mage as Delivered by
   Abraham the Jew Unto His Son Lamech, a Grimoire ofthe Fifteenth Century. Translated by
   S.L. MacGregor Mathers. London: Watkins, 1900. Reprint, New York: Dover
   Publications, Inc., 1975. Most recent edition: Wellingborough, UK: Aquarian Press,
   1983.
Briggs Myers, Isabel. Gifts Differing. 2nd ed. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists
   Press, 1995.
Colquhoun, Ithell. Sword of Wisdom, MacGregor Mathers and “The Golden Dawn.” New
   York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1975.
Crowley, Aleister. Magick, Liber ABA, Book Four. 2d ed., Edited by Hymenaeus Beta. York
   Beach, ME: Weiser Books, Inc.,1997.
       . Magick, Liber ABA, Book Four. 2d ed., Edited by Hymenaeus Beta. York Beach,
   ME: Weiser Books, Inc.,1997.
       . The Book of Thoth by The Master Therion (Aleister Crowley): A Short Essay on the
   Tarot ofthe Egyptians. London: O.T.O., 1944. The Equinox III (5). Reprint, York
   Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1992.
       . The Confessions ofAleister Crowley. London, 1929. Abridged one-volume edition,
   edited by John Symonds and Kenneth Grant. London, 1969. Reprint, London and
   New York: Arkana 1989.
       . The Equinox
                   | (5). Spring 1911, edited by Soror Virakam. London. Reprinted
   York Beach, ME: Weiser Books, Inc., 1992.
       . The Equinox
                   | (6). Fall 1911, edited by Soror Virakam. London. Reprint, York
   Beach, ME: Weiser Books, Inc., 1992.
       . The Equinox
                   I (8). Fall 1912, edited by Soror Virakam. London. Reprint, York
   Beach, ME: Weiser Books, Inc., 1992.
       . The Equinox ofthe Gods. London: O.T.O., 1936. The Equinox III (3). Corrected
   facsimile editions, Scottsdale, AZ: New Falcon Publications, 1991, and New York: 93
   Publishing, 1992.
Bibliography                                                                               329


       . The Heart ofthe Master. First edition published in 1938 by Ordo Templi Orientis,
   London. Revised edition © 1992 Ordo Templi Orientis. Scottsdale, AZ: New Falcon
   Publications, 1992.
       . Konx Om Pax. Foyers, Scotland: Society for the Propagation of Religious Truth,
   1907. Reprint, with an Introduction by Martin P. Starr, Chicago: The Teitan Press,
   1990.
       . Liber Aleph vel CXI: The Book of Wisdom or Folly. Edited by Karl Germer and
   Marcelo Motta. Barstow, CA: Thelema Publishing Co., 1961. The Equinox III (6), rev.
   2d, ed. Edited by Hymenaeus Beta. York Beach, ME: Weiser Books, Inc., 1991, and
   New York: 93 Publishing, 1991.
———. The Law Is for All. Scottsdale, AZ: New Falcon Publications, 1991.
       . Liber LXV, Liber Cordis Cincti Serpente, subfugurafigura ynda. from The Holy
   Books of Thelema. York Beach, ME: Weiser Books, Inc., 1983.
       . Little Essays Toward Truth. London: O.T.O.,1936. Reprint, Scottsdale, AZ: New
   Falcon Publications, 1991.
       . Orpheus, Liber Primus Vel Carminum. Foyers: Society for the Propagation of
   Religious Truth, 1907. Reprint, Chicago, IL: Yogi Publications, 1978.
       . The Qabalah of Aleister Crowley. New York: Weiser Books, Inc., 1973. Retitled 777
   and Other Qabalistic Writings of Aleister Crowley in the fifth printing, 1977. Reprinted
   York Beach, ME: Weiser Books, Inc., 1990.
       . Tarot Divination. York Beach, ME: Weiser Books Inc., 1976.
       . (received by). [Thelema] Tnedeya The Holy Books of
                                                         Thelema, Edited by
   Hymenaeus Alpha and Hymenaeus Beta. York Beach, ME: Weiser Books, Inc., 1983.
   The Equinox III (9). Corrected second printing, York Beach, ME: Weiser Books, Inc.,
   1983 and New York: 93 Publishing, 1990.
       . The Vision and The Voice—aith Commentary and Other Papers. York Beach, ME:
   Weiser Books, Inc., 1998.
DuQuette, Lon Milo. Angels, Demons and Gods ofthe New Millennium. York Beach, ME:
   Weiser Books, Inc., 1997.
       . The Magick of
                    Thelema. York Beach, ME: Weiser Books, Inc., 1993.
       . Tarot ofCeremonial Magick. York Beach, ME: Weiser Books, Inc., 1995.
———. The Chicken Qabalah ofRabbi Lamed Ben Clifford. York Beach, ME: Weiser
   Books, Inc., 2001.
Eliade, Mircea. A History ofReligious Ideas. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984.
Fortune, Dion. The Mystical Qabalah. London: Ernest Benn Limited, 1976.
Friedman, Irving. The Book ofCreation. York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, Inc, 1977.
James, William. The Varieties ofReligious Experience. London: Longmans, 1910.
Jung, Carl G. Man and His Symbols. London: Aldus Books, 1964.
Kalisch, Isidor. Sepher Yezirah:
                               A Book on Creation, or TheJewish Metaphysics ofRemote
   Antiquity. New York: L. H. Frank & Co., 1877.
Kaplan, Aryeh, trans. Sepher Yetzerah. York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1990.
Kraig, Donald Michael. Modern Sex Magick. St. Paul, MN: Llewellyn Publications, 1998.
George M. Lamsa, trans. The Holy Biblefrom the Ancient Eastern Manuscripts, Translated
   from Aramaic. Trans. Philadelphia, PA: A. J.Homan Company, 1967.
Levi, Eliphas. The Key ofthe Mysteries. Translated by Aleister Crowley. York Beach, ME:
   Weiser Books, Inc., 1970; London: Rider & Co., 1969. Also as a special supplement to
   Equinox 1(10).
330                                                                             Bibliography


          . The History ofMagic. Translated by Arthur Edward Waite. London: Rider, 1957;
      York Beach, ME: Weiser Books, Inc., 1970.
          . Transcendental Magic: Its Doctrine and Ritual, Translated by Arthur Edward
   Waite. London: Rider & Co., 1896; York Beach, ME: Weiser Books, Inc., 1974.
Mathers, S. L. MacGregor, trans. The Kabbalah Unveiled. York Beach, ME: Weiser Books,
  Inc., 1974.
Mordell, Phineas. The Origin ofLetters and Numbers According to the Sefer Yetzirah. York
      Beach: Samuel Weiser, Inc., 1975.
Quigley, Joan. Astrology for Adults,New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston., 1969.
Regardie, Israel. The Complete Golden Dawn System ofMagic. Phoenix, AZ: New Falcon
      Press, 1984.
          . The Eye in the Triangle. Scottsdale, AZ: New Falcon Press, 1989.
          . The Golden Dawn. 6th ed. St. Paul: Llewellyn Publications, 1992.
Roberts, Susan. Magician ofthe Golden Dawn. Chicago, IL: Contemporary Books, Inc.,
      1978.
Rosengarten, Arthur. Psychology and Tarot: Spectrums ofPossibility. New York, NY: Paragon
      House, 2000.
Stirling, William. The Canon. First Edition, London: Elkin Matthews, 1897. Second
      Edition, London: Research into Lost Knowledge Organisation in association with The
   Garnstone Press, 1974. Third Edition published in 1981 by Research into Lost
      Knowledge Organisation, 8 The Drive, New Southgate, London N11 2DY.
      Distributed by Thorson’s publishers Limited, Wellingborough, Northamptonshire,
      England.
Suares, Carlo. The Sepher Yetsira. Translated by Micheline and Vincent Stuart. Boulder &
      London: Shambhala, 1976.
Townley, Kevin. The Cube ofSpace, Container of Creation. Boulder, CO: Archive Press,
      1993.
Wang, Robert. An Introduction to the Golden Dawn Tarot. York Beach, ME: Weiser Books,
   Inc., 1978.
          . Qabalistic Tarot. York Beach, ME: Weiser Books, Inc., 1990.
Whicher, Olive. Sunspace: Science at a Threshold ofSpiritual Understanding. London: Rufolf
      Steiner Press, 1989.
Zoroaster. The Chaldean Oracles ofZoroaster.Translated by Ruth Majereik. Leiden and
   New York: Brill, 1989.
                              PERMISSIONS

                                         CE


Illustrations from Aleister Crowley Thoth Tarot ® reproduced by permission of AGM
AGMiiller, CH-8212 Neuhausen, Switzerland. © copyright AGM AGMiiller / OTO.
Further reproduction prohibited.


Letters by Frieda Harris are copyright the Frieda Harris Estate. All reasonable attempts
have been made to trace the holders of the rights concerned.

Letters by Aleister Crowley and other Aleister Crowley quotations copyright © Ordo
Templi Orientis.


For Crowley- Harris correspondence, the author wishes to thank the George Arents
Research Library, Bird Library, Syracuse University.


A Magick Life, The Biography of Aleister Crowley by Martin Booth, (London: Hodder &
Stoughton, 2000), copyright © 2000 Ordo Templi Orientis for all material by Aleister
Crowley. Used with Permission.

Do What Thou Wilt, A Life of Aleister Crowley, by Lawrence Sutin (NY: St. Martin's Press,
2000).

Perdurabo: The Life of Aleister Crowley, by Richard Kaczynski, Ph.D. (Scottsdale, AZ: New
Falcon Publications, 2002).
‘Tarot


“Lon Milo DuQuette is that rarest of writers: a man who knows his subject from the inside out,
and at the same time can write clearly and gracefully. This book will indeed bring Aleister
Crowley's and Frieda Harris’s brilliant Thoth Tarot to new generations ofTarot lover:
                                     —Rachel Pollack, author of The Complete I/tustrated Guide to
                                                            Tarot and Seventy-Eight Degrees of Wisdom


“Lon Milo DuQuette’s Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot is a warm-hearted yet pro-
found tour of the Thoth deck by a very wise gentleman. An extremely lucid account of a for-

merly difÏcult subject, every word should be savored, laughed over, and seriously contem-
plated.”   —Mary K. Greer, author of Tarot for Your Self and The Complete Book of Tarot Reversals


Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot deck, one of the most popular tarot decks ever, is chock-full of
occult symbolism. While Crowley’s own book, The Book of Thoth purports to explain the hidden

symbolism in full, it expects readers to have in-depth knowledge ofvarious occult fields. What
is missing, and what Lon Milo DuQuette provides, is a key to the Thoth Tarot’s deeper mean-
ings for those of us who might not be as well-versed in esoteric thought as Crowley assumes.
“This is the first book since Crowley’s Tie Book of Thoth vo investigate the unique spiritual her-

itage thar distinguishes the Thoth Tarot from countless other decks—a heritage that is the true
source of its distinctive symbolic meaning and artistry.           DuQuette succeeds admirably               in

explaining its symbols and their underpinnings in terms understandable to new students. In
doing so, he shows how the use of this deck can open up the wonders of the Qabalah, the mys-

teries of Thelema, and the treasure-house of Crowley's writings, in a way that simple book-
learning cannot.”                                       —Hymenacus Beta, Frater Superior, OTO


DuQuette explains the varied symbolism and correspondences—Qabalistic, astrological, numero-
logical, ete.—of each card in detail, with wit and clarity. More than just another tarot “cookbook”
with rote explanations and meanings of the individual cards,           Understanding Aleister   Crowley's Thoth
Tarot is both a valuable guide to the esoteric meani gs of the cards and a look at the deck as it fits

in with Crowley's system of Magick. This book is a new and valuable resource for anyone work-

ing with the Thoth ‘Laror deck.


                Lon Milo DuQuette has been involved with occult studies since the late 1960s
                and has become an acknowledged and widely recognized authority within the
                world of modern occultism. As a member of Crowley’s legacy order, the OTO,

                he is uniquely qualified to write this guide to the Thoth ‘Tarot. Lon lives with
                his wife, Constance, in Costa Mesa, California.


   0
                                       WEISERBOOKS
                                    Cover design by Dutton & Sherman
